He loved the great game as if he were their father. 

— Anglo-Saxon Chronicle. 

Tell me the course, the voyage, the ports and the new stars. 

— Bliss Carman. 



I 



AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

CHAPTER I 
A RAILROAD THROUGH THE PLEISTOCENE 

The great world movement which began with the voy- 
ages of Columbus and Vasco da Gama, and which has gone 
on with ever-increasing rapidity and complexity until our 
own time, has developed along a myriad lines of interest. In 
no way has it been more interesting than in the way in which 
it has brought into sudden, violent, and intimate contact 
phases of the world's life history which would normally be 
separated by untold centuries of slow development. Again 
and again, in the continents new to peoples of European 
stock, we have seen the spectacle of a high civilization all 
at once thrust into and superimposed upon a wilderness of 
savage men and savage beasts. Nowhere, and at no time, 
has the contrast been more strange and more striking than 
in British East Africa during the last dozen years. 

The country lies directly under the equator; and the 
hinterland, due west, contains the huge Nyanza lakes, vast 
inland seas which gather the head-waters of the White Nile. 
This hinterland, with its lakes and its marshes, its snow- 
capped mountains, its high, dry plateaus, and its forests 
of deadly luxuriance, was utterly unknown to white men 
half a century ago. The map of Ptolemy in the second cen- 
tury of our era gave a more accurate view of the lakes, 
mountains, and head-waters of the Nile than the maps pub- 
lished at the beginning of the second half of the nineteenth 
century, just before Speke, Grant, and Baker made their 
great trips of exploration and adventure. Behind these 
explorers came others; and then adventurous missionaries, 
traders, and elephant hunters; and many men, whom risk 

1 



2 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

did not daunt, who feared neither danger nor hardship, 
traversed the country hither and thither, now for onfi rea- 
son, now for another, now as naturahsts, rov/ as geog- 
raphers, and again as government officials or as mere 
wanderers who loved the wild and strange life which had 
survived over from an elder age. 

Most of the tribes were of pure savages; but here and 
there were intrusive races of higher type; and in Uganda, 
beyond the Victoria Nyanza, and on the head-waters of 
the Nile proper, lived a people which had advanced to the 
upper stages of barbarism, which might almost be said to 
have developed a very primitive kind of semi-civilization. 
Over this people — for its good fortune — Great Britain estab- 
lished a protectorate; and ultimately, in order to get easy 
access to this new outpost of civilization in the heart of the 
Dark Continent, the British Government built a railroad 
from the old Arab coast town of Mombasa westward to 
Victoria Nyanza. 

This railroad, the embodiment of the eager, masterful, 
materialistic civilization of to-day, was pushed through a 
region in which nature, both as regards wild man and wild 
beast, did not and does not differ materially from what it was 
in Europe in the late Pleistocene. The comparison is not 
fanciful. The teeming multitudes of wild creatures, the stu- 
pendous size of some of them, the terrible nature of others, 
and the low culture of many of the savage tribes, especially 
of the hunting tribes, substantially reproduces the conditions 
of life in Europe as it was led by our ancestors ages before 
the dawn of anything that could be called civilization. The 
great beasts that now live in East Africa were in that by-gone 
age represented by close kinsfolk in Europe; and in many 
places, up to the present moment, African man, absolutely 
naked, and armed as our early paleolithic ancestors were 
armed, lives among, and on, and in constant dread of, these 
beasts, just as was true of the men to whom the cave lion 
was a nightmare of terror, and the mammoth . and the 
woolly rhinoceros possible but most formidable prey. 



1 



THROUGH THE PLEISTOCENE 








sic 



Map of the Uj'randa Railway, British East Africa. Total length from Mombasa on 
the Indian Ocean to Port Florence on Lake Victoria Nyanza, 581 miles 

This region, this great fragment out of the long-buried 
past of our race, is now accessible by railroad to all who 
care to go thither; and no field more inviting offers itself 
to hunter or naturalist, while even to the ordinary traveller 
it teems with interest. On March 23, 1909, I sailed thither 
from New York, in charge of a scientific expedition sent 
out by the Smithsonian, to collect birds, mammals, reptiles, 
and plants, but especially specimens of big game, for the 
National Museum at Washington. In addition to myself 
and my son Kermit (who had entered Harvard a few 
months previously), the party consisted of three naturalists: 
Surgeon-Lieut. Col. Edgar A. Mearns, U.S.A., retired; Mr. 
Edmund Heller, of California, and Mr. J. Alden Loring, 
of Owego, N. Y. My arrangements for the trip had been 
chiefly made through two valued English friends, Mr. 
Frederick Courteney Selous, the greatest of the world's 
big-game hunters, and Mr. Edward North Buxton, also a 
mighty hunter. On landing we were to be met by Messrs. 
R. J. Cuninghame and Leslie Tarlton, both famous hunt- 



4 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

ers; the latter an Australian, who served through the South 
African war; the former by birth a Scotchman, and a Cam- 
bridge man, but long a resident of Africa, and at one time 
a professional elephant hunter — in addition to having been 
a whaler in the Arctic Ocean, a hunter-naturalist in Lap- 
land, a transport rider in South Africa, and a collector for 
the British Museum in various odd corners of the earth. 

We sailed on the Hamburg from New York — what head- 
way the Germans have made among those who go down 
to the sea in ships! — and at Naples trans-shipped to the 
Admiral, of another German line, the East African. On 
both ships we were as comfortable as possible, and the voyage 
was wholly devoid of incidents. Now and then, as at the 
Azores, at Suez, and at Aden, the three naturalists landed, 
and collected some dozens or scores of birds — which next 
day were skinned and prepared in my room, as the largest 
and best fitted for the purpose. After reaching Suez the 
ordinary tourist type of passenger ceased to be predomi- 
nant; in his place there were Italian officers going out to a 
desolate coast town On the edge of Somaliland; mission- 
aries, German, English, and American; Portuguese civil 
officials; traders of different nationalities; and planters 
and military and civil officers bound to German and British 
East Africa. The Englishmen included planters, magis- 
trates, forest officials, army officers on leave from India, 
and other army officers going out to take command of black 
native levies in out-of-the-way regions where the English 
flag stands for all that makes life worth living. They were 
a fine set, these young Englishmen, whether dashing army 
officers or capable civilians; they reminded me of our own 
men who have reflected such honor on the American name, 
whether in civil and military positions in the Philippines and 
Porto Rico, working on the Canal Zone in Panama, taking 
care of the custom-houses in San Domingo, or serving in 
the army of occupation in Cuba. Moreover, I felt as if I 
knew most of them already, for they might have walked out 
of the pages of Kipling. But I was not as well prepared for 



THROUCxH THE PLEISTOCENE 5 

the corresponding and equally interesting types among the 
Germans, the planters, the civil officials, the officers who 
had commanded, or were about to command, white or na- 
tive troops; men of evident power and energy, seeing whom 
made it easy to understand why German East Africa has 




We would gather on deck around Selous to listen to tales 

of strange adventures 

From tt photograph by Kcrinit Roosevelt 

thriven apace. They are first-class men, these English and 
Germans; both are doing in East Africa a work of worth 
to the whole world; there is ample room for both, and no 
possible cause for any but a thoroughly friendly rivalry; and 
it is earnestly to be wished, in the interest both of them and 
of outsiders, too, that their relations will grow, as they ought 
to grow, steadily better — and not only in East Africa but 
everywhere else. 

On the ship, at Naples, we found Selous, also bound 
for East Africa on a hunting trip; but he, a veteran whose 
first hunting in Africa was nearly forty years ago, cared only 
for exceptional trophies of a very few animals, while we, on 
the other hand, desired specimens of both sexes of all the 
species of big game that Kermit and I could shoot, as well 



AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 



as complete series of all the smaller mammals. We be- 
lieved that our best work of a purely scientific character 
would be done with the mammals, both large and small. 

No other hunter alive has had the experience of Selous; 
and, so far as I now recall, no hunter of anything like his 




A baobab- tree, Mombasa 
From a photograph by Kertnit Roosevelt 



experience has ever also possessed his gift of penetrating 
observation joined to his power of vivid and accurate nar- 
ration. He has killed scores of lion and rhinoceros and 
hundreds of elephant and buffalo; and these four animals 
are the most dangerous of the world's big game, when 
hunted as they are hunted in Africa. To hear him tell of 
what he has seen and done is no less interesting to a nat- 
uralist than to a hunter. There were on the ship many 



THROUGH THE PLEISTOCENE 7 

men who loved wild nature, and who were keen hunters 
of big game; and almost every day, as we steamed over 
the hot, smooth waters of the Red Sea and the Indian 
Ocean, we would gather on deck around Selous to listen 
to tales of those strange adventures that only come to the 
man who has lived long the lonely life of the wilderness. 




Kermit Roosevelt and R. J. Cuninghame preparing to 
take pictures 

On April 21 we steamed into the beautiful and pictu- 
resque harbor of Mombasa. Many centuries before the 
Christian era, dhows from Arabia, carrying seafarers of 
Semitic races whose very names have perished, rounded the 
Lion's Head at Guardafui and crept slowly southward 
along the barren African coast. Such dhows exist to-day 
almost unchanged, and bold indeed were the men who first 
steered them across the unknown oceans. They were men 
of iron heart and supple conscience, who fronted inconceiv- 



AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 



able danger and hardship; they estabhshed trading stations 
for gold and ivory and slaves; they turned these trading 
stations into little cities and sultanates, half Arab, half negro. 
Mombasa was among them. In her time of brief splendor 

Portugal seized the 
city; the Arabs won 
it back ; and now Eng- 
land holds it. It lies just 
south of the equator, 
and when we saw it the 
brilliant green of the 
tropic foliage showed 
the town at its best. 

We were welcomed 
to Government House 
in most cordial fash- 
ion by the acting Gov- 
ernor, Lieutenant- 
Governor Jackson, who 
is not only a trained 
public official of long 
experience but a first- 
class field naturalist 
and a renowned big- 
game hunter; indeed I 
could not too warmly 
express my apprecia- 
tion of the hearty and 
generous courtesy with 
which we were received 
and treated alike by the official and the unofficial world' 
throughout East Africa. We landed in the kind of torren- 
tial downpour that only comes in the tropics; it reminded 
me of Panama at certain moments in the rainy season. 
That night we were given a dinner by the Mombasa Club; 
and it was interesting to meet the merchants and planters 
of the town and the neighborhood as well as the officials. 




V. (_■. Selous 
/•"row rt fihotosraph by 11'. N. McMillan 



THROUGH THE PLEISTOCENE 



The former included not only Englishmen but also Ger- 
mans and Italians; which is quite as it should be, for at 
least part of the high inland region of British East Africa 
can be made one kind 
of "white man's coun- 
try"; and to achieve 
this white men should 
work heartily together, 
doing scrupulous jus- 
tice to the natives, but 
remembering that 
progress and develop- 
ment in this particular 
kind of new land de- 
pend exclusively upon 
the masterful leader- 
ship of the whites, and 
that therefore it is 
both a calamity and a 
crime to permit the 
whites to be riven in 
sunder by hatreds and 
jealousies. The coast 
regions of British East 
Africa are not suited 
for extensive white 
settlement ; but the 
hinterland is, and 
there everything 
should be done to en- 
courage such settle- 
ment. Non-white 
aliens should not be 
encouraged to settle where they come into rivalry with the 
whites (exception being made as regards certain particular 
individuals and certain particular occupations). 

There are, of course, large regions on the coast and in 




R. J. Cuninghame, known to the Swahilis as "Bwana 

Medivu," the master with the beard 

From a photograph by Edmund Heller 



10 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

the interior where ordinary white settlers cannot Hve, in 
which it would be wise to settle immigrants from India, and 
there are many positions in other regions which it is to the 
advantage of everybody that the Indians should hold, be- 
cause there is as yet no sign that sufficient numbers of white 
men are willing to hold them, while the native blacks, 
although many of them do fairly well in unskilled labor, are 
not yet competent to do the higher tasks which now fall to 
the share of the Goanese, and Moslem and non-Moslem 
Indians. The small merchants who deal with the natives, 
for instance, and most of the minor railroad officials, belong 
to these latter classes. I was amused, by the way, at one 
bit of native nomenclature in connection with the Goanese. 
Many of the Goanese are now as dark as most of the other 
Indians; but they are descended in the male line from the 
early Portuguese adventurers and conquerors, who were the 
first white men ever seen by the natives of this coast. Ac- 
cordingly to this day some of the natives speak even of the 
dark-skinned descendants of the subjects of King Henry the 
Navigator as "the whites," designating the Europeans spe- 
cifically as English, Germans, or the like; just as in out-of- 
the-way nooks in the far Northwest one of our own red men 
will occasionally be found who still speaks of Americans and 
Englishmen as "Boston men" and "King George's men." 

One of the government farms was being run by an edu- 
cated colored man from Jamaica; and we were shown much 
courtesy by a colored man from our own country who was 
practising as a doctor. No one could fail to be impressed 
with the immense advance these men represented as com- 
pared with the native negro; and indeed to an American, 
who must necessarily think much of the race problem at 
home, it is pleasant to be made to realize in vivid fashion 
the progress the American negro has made, by comparing 
him with the negro who dwells in Africa untouched, or but 
lightly touched, by white influence. 

In such a community as one finds in Mombasa or Nairobi 
one continually runs across quiet, modest men whose lives 



THROUGH THE PLEISTOCENE 



11 



have been fuller of wild adventure than the life of a viking 
leader of the ninth century. One of the public officials 
whom I met at the Governor's table was Major Hinde. 
H: had at one time served under the government of the 
Congo Free State; and, at a crisis in the fortunes of the 




Mr. Roosevelt saying good-by in the Mombasa station 
From a photograph by Kermit Roosevelt 

State, when the Arab slave-traders bade fair to get the 
upper hand, he was one of the eight or ten white men, repre- 
senting half as many distinct nationalities, who overthrew 
the savage soldiery of the slave-traders and shattered beyond 
recovery the Arab power. They organized the wild pagan 
tribes just as their Arab foes had done; they fought in a 
land where deadly sickness struck down victor and van- 
quished with ruthless impartiality; they found their com- 



12 AFRICAN (;AME TRAILS 

missariat as best they could wherever they happened to be; 
often they depended upon one day's victory to furnish the 
ammunition with which to wage the morrow-'s battle; and 
ever they had to be on guard no less against the thousands 
of cannibals in their own ranks than against the thousands 
of cannibals in the hostile' ranks, for, on whichever side 
they fought, after every battle the warriors of the man-eating 
tribes watched their chance to butcher the wounded indis- 
criminately and to feast on the bodies of the slain. 

The most thrilling book of true lion stories ever written 
is Colonel Patterson's "The Man-eaters of Tsavo." Colonel 
Patterson was one of the engineers engaged, some ten or 
twelve years back, in building the Uganda Railway; he 
was in charge of the work, at a place called Tsavo, when it 
was brought to a complete halt by the ravages of a couple 
of man-eating lions which, after many adventures, he finally 
killed. At the dinner at the Mombasa Club I met one of 
the actors in a blood-curdling tragedy which Colonel Patter- 
son relates. He was a German, and, in company with an 
Italian friend, he went down in the special car of one of the 
English railroad officials to try to kill a man-eating lion 
which had carried away several people from a station on the 
line. They put the car on a siding; as it was hot the door 
was left open, and the Englishman sat by the open window 
to watch for the lion, while the Italian finally lay down on 
the floor and the German got into an upper bunk. Evi- 
dently the Englishman must have fallen asleep, and the 
lion, seeing him through the window, entered the carriage 
by the door to get at him. The Italian waked to find the 
lion standing on him with its hind feet, while its fore paws 
were on the seat as it killed the unfortunate Englishman, 
and the German, my informant, hearing the disturbance, 
leaped out of his bunk actually onto the back of the lion. 
The man-eater, however, was occupied only with his prey; 
holding the body in his mouth he forced his way out through 
the window- sash, and made his meal undisturbed but a 
couple of hundred yards from the railway carriage. 



THROUGH THE PLEISTOCENE 



13 



The day after we landed we boarded the train to take 
what seems to me, as I think it would to most men fond of 
natural history, the most interesting railway journey in the 
world. It was Governor Jackson's special train, and in addi- 
tion to his own party and ours there was only Selous; and 
we travelled with the utmost comfort through a naturalist's 
wonderland. All civilized governments are now realizing 
that it is their duty here and there to preserve, unharmed. 




Train on the Uj^anda Railway • 
From a photograph by Kermit Roosevelt 

tracts of wild nature, with thereon the wild things the de- 
struction of which means the destruction of half the charm 
of wild nature. The EngHsh Government has made a large 
game reserve of much of the region on the way to Nairobi, 
stretching far to the south, arid one mile to the north, of the 
track. The reserve swarms with game; it would be of little 
value except as a reserve; and the attraction it now offers 
to travellers renders it an asset of real consequence to the 
whole colony. The wise people of Maine, in our own 
country, have discovered that intelligent game preservation, 
carried out in good faith, and in a spirit of common-sense as 



14 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

far removed from mushy sentimentality as from brutality, 
results in adding one more to the State's natural resources 
of value; and in consequence there are more moose and 
deer in Maine to-day than there were forty years ago; there 
is a better chance for every man m Maine, rich or poor, pro- 
vided that he is not a game butcher, to enjoy his share of 
good hunting; and the number of sportsmen and tourists 
attracted to the State adds very appreciably to the means 
of livelihood of the citizen. Game reserves should not be 
established where they are detrimental to the interests of 
large bodies of settlers, nor yet should they be nominally 
established in regions so remote that the only men really 
interfered with are those who respect the law, while a pre- 
mium is thereby put on the activity of the unscrupulous 
persons who are eager to break it. Similarly, game laws 
should be drawn primarily in the interest of the whole 
people, keeping steadily in mind certain facts that ought 
to be self-evident to every one above the intellectual level 
of those well-meaning persons who apparently think that 
all shooting is wrong and that man could continue to exist 
if all wild animals were allowed to increase unchecked. 
There must be recognition of the fact that almost any wild 
animal of the defenceless type, if its multiplication were 
unchecked while its natural enemies, the dangerous carni- 
vores, were killed, would by its simple increase crowd man 
off the planet; and of the further fact that, far short of 
such increase, a time speedily comes when the existence of 
too much game is incompatible with the interests, or indeed 
the existence, of the cultivator. As in most other matters, 
it is only the happy mean which is healthy and rational. 
There should be certain sanctuaries and nurseries where 
game can live and breed absolutely unmolested; and else- 
where the laws should so far as possible provide for the 
continued existence of the game in sufficient numbers to 
allow a reasonable amount of hunting on fair terms to any 
hardy and vigorous man fond of the sport, and yet not in 
sufficient numbers to jeopard the interests of the actual 



I 



THROUGH THE PLEISTOCENE 



15 



settler, the tiller of the soil, the man whose well-being 
should be the prime object to be kept in mind by every 
statesman. Game butchery is as objectionable as any 




Mr. Roosevelt, Governor Jackson, Mr. Selous, and Dr. Mearns, riding 
in front of the engine on the way to Kapiti 
From a photograph by Kermit Roosevelt 

other form of wanton cruelty or barbarity; but to protest 
against all hunting of game is a sign of softness of head, not 
of soundness of heart. 



16 AFRICAN CxAME TRAILS 

In the creation of the great game reserve through which 
the Uganda Railway runs the British Government has 
conferred a boon upon mankind, and no less in the enact- 
ment and enforcement of the game laws in the African 
provinces generally. Of course experience will show where, 
from time to time, there must be changes. In Uganda 
proper buffaloes and hippos throve so under protection as 
to become sources of grave danger not only to the crops but 
to the lives of the natives, and they had to be taken off the 
protected list and classed as vermin, to be shot in any num- 
ber at any time; and only the great demand for ivory 
prevented the necessity of following the same course with 
regard to the elephant; while recently in British East 
Africa the increase of the zebras, and the harm they did to 
the crops of the settlers, rendered it necessary to remove a 
large measure of the protection formerly accorded them, 
and in some cases actually to encourage their slaughter; 
and increase in settlement may necessitate further changes. 
But, speaking generally, much wisdom and foresight, highly 
creditable to both, government and people, have been 
shown in dealing with and preserving East African game 
while at the same time safeguarding the interests of the 
settlers. 

On our train the locomotive was fitted with a comfort- 
able seat across the cow-catcher, and on this, except at meal- 
time, I spent most of the hours of daylight, usually in com- 
pany with Selous, and often with Governor Jackson, to 
whom the territory and the game were alike familiar. The 
first afternoon we did not see many wild animals, but birds 
abounded, and the scenery was both beautiful and interest- 
ing. A black-and-white hornbill, feeding on the track, rose 
so late that we nearly caught it with our hands; guinea-fowl 
and francolin, and occasionally bustard, rose near by; brill- 
iant rollers, sun-birds, bee-eaters, and weaver-birds flew 
beside us, or sat unmoved among the trees as. the train 
passed. In the dusk we nearly ran over a hyena; a year 
or two previously the train actually did run over a lioness 




Mr. Roosevelt and some members of his caravan 
Front a photograph by Kcriiiit Roosevelt 



18 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

one night, and the conductor brought in her head in triumph. 
In fact, there have been continual mishaps such as could 
only happen to a railroad in the Pleistocene! The very 
night we went up there was an interruption in the telegraph 
service due to giraffes having knocked down some of the 
wires and a pole in crossing the track; and elephants have 
more than once performed the same feat. Two or three 
times, at night, giraffes have been run into and killed; once 
a rhinoceros was killed, the engine being damaged in the 
encounter; and on other occasions the rhino has only just 
left the track in time, once the beast being struck and a 
good deal hurt, the engine again being somewhat crippled. 
But the lions now offer, and have always offered, the chief 
source of unpleasant excitement. Throughout East Africa 
the lions continually take to man-eating at the expense of 
the native tribes, and white hunters are continually being 
killed or crippled by them. At the lonely stations on the 
railroad the two or three subordinate officials often live 
in terror of some fearsome brute that has taken to haunting 
the vicinity; and every few months, at some one of these 
stations, a man is killed, or badly hurt by, or narrowly 
escapes from, a prowling lion. 

The stations at which the train stopped were neat and 
attractive; and besides the Indian officials there were 
usually natives from the neighborhood. Some of these 
might be dressed in the fez and shirt and trousers which 
indicate a coming under the white man's influence, or 
which, rather curiously, may also indicate Mohammedan- 
ism. But most of the natives are still wild pagans, and 
many of them are unchanged in the slightest particular 
from what their forefathers were during the countless ages 
when they alone were the heirs of the land — a land which 
they were utterly powerless in any way to improve. Some 
of the savages we saw wore red blankets, and in deference 
to white prejudice draped them so as to hide their naked- 
ness. But others appeared — men and women — with liter- 
ally not one stitch of clothing, although they might have 



THROUGH THE PLEISTOCENE 19 

rather elaborate haif-dresses, and masses of metal ornaments 
on their arms and legs. In the region where one tribe 
dwelt all the people had their front teeth filed to sharp 
points; it was strange to see a group of these savages, stark 
naked, with oddly shaved heads and filed teeth, armed 
with primitive bows and arrows^ stand gravely gazing at 
the train as it rolled into some station; and none the less 
strange, by the way, because the locomotive was a Bald- 
win, brought to Africa across the great ocean from our 
own country. One group of women, nearly nude, had their 
upper arms so tightly bound with masses of bronze or cop- 
per wire that their muscles were completely malformed. 
So tightly was the wire wrapped round the upper third of 
the upper arm, that it was reduced to about one-half of 
its normal size; and the muscles could only play, and that 
in deformed fashion, below this unyielding metal bandage. 
Why the arms did not mortify it was hard to say; and their 
freedom of use was so hampered as to make it diflficult to 
understand how men or women whose whole lives are passed 
in one or another form of manual labor could inflict upon 
themselves such crippling and pointless punishment. 

Next morning we were in the game country, and as we 
sat on the seat over the cow-catcher it was literally like 
passing through a vast zoological garden. Indeed no such 
railway journey can be taken on any other line in any other 
land. At one time we passed a herd of a dozen or so of 
great giraffes, cows and calves, cantering along through the 
open woods a couple of hundred yards to the right of the 
train. Again, still closer, four waterbuck cows, their big 
ears thrown forward, stared at us without moving until 
we had passed. Hartebeests were everywhere; one herd 
was on the track, and when the engine whistled they bucked 
and sprang with ungainly agility and galloped clear of the 
danger. A long-tailed straw-colored monkey ran from one 
tree to another. Huge black ostriches appeared from 
time to time. Once a troop of impalla, close by the track, 
took fright; and as the beautiful creatures fled we saw now 



^) AFRICAN (,AME i RAILS 

one and now anotlier bound clear over the high bushes. A 
herd of zebra clattered across a cutting of the line not a 
hundred yards ahead of the train; the whistle hurried their 
progress, but only for a moment, and as we passed they 
were already turning round to gaze. The wild creatures 
were in their sanctuary, and they knew it. Some of the 
settlers have at times grumbled at this game reserve being 
kept of such size; but surely it is one of the most valuable 
possessions the country could have. The lack of water in 
parts, the prevalence in other parts of diseases harmful to 
both civilized man and domestic cattle, render this great 
tract of country the home of all homes for the creatures of 
the waste. The protection given these wild creatures is 
genuine, not nominal; they are preserved, not for the 
pleasure of the few, but for the good of all who choose to 
see this strange and attractive spectacle; and from this nur- 
sery and breeding-ground the overflow keeps up tlie stock 
of game in the adjacent land, to the benefit of the settler 
to whom the game gives fresh meat, and to the benefit of 
the w hole country because of the attraction it furnishes to 
all who desire to visit a veritable happy hunting ground. 

Soon after lunch we drew up at the little station of 
Kapiti Plains, where our safari was awaiting us; "safari" 
being the term employed throughout East Africa to denote 
both the caravan with which one makes an expedition and 
the expedition itself. Our aim being to cure and send home 
specimens of all the common big game — in addition to as 
large a series as possible of the small mammals and birds 
— it was necessary to carry an elaborate apparatus of 
naturalists' supplies; we had brought with us, for instance, 
four tons of fine salt, as to cure the skins of the big beasts 
is a herculean labor under the best conditions; we had 
hundreds of traps for the small creatures; many boxes 
of shot-gun cartridges in addition to the ordinary rifle 
cartridges which alone would be necessary on a hunting 
trip; and, in short, all the many impedimenta needed if 
scientific work is to be properly done under modern con- 



THROUGH THE PLEISTOCENE 



21 



ditions. Few laym'en have any idea of the expense and 
pains which must be undergone in order to provide groups 
of mounted big animals from far-off lands, such as we see 




A large American IIul; \v:i^ lloaUiiij '&gt;\'fv my "wn triit 
From a photog7-aph hy Kirmit Roosevelt 

in museums like the National Museum in Washington 
and the American Museum of Natural History in New 
York. The modern naturalist must realize that in some of 
Its branches his profession, while more than ever a science, 
has also become an art. So our preparations were neces- 



22 



AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 



sarily on a very large scale; and as we drew up at the station 
the array of porters and of tents looked as if some small 
military expedition was about to start. As a compliment, 
which I much appreciated, a large American flag was float- 
ing over my own tent; and in the front line, flanking this 
tent on either hand, were other big tents for the members 
of the party, with a dining tent and skinning tent; while be- 
hind were the tents of the two hundred porters, the gun- 




The askaris aiul [)urlt'rs dra«ii 
In front of the tent stood the men in two lines; the first containing the 

From a filwtog raph 

bearers, the tent boys, the askaris or native soldiers, and 
the horse boys or saises. In front of the tents stood the 
men in two lines; the first containing the fifteen askaris, 
the second the porters with their headmen. The askaris 
were uniformed, each in a red fez, a blue blouse, and white 
knickerbockers, and each carrying his rifle and belt. The 
porters were chosen from several different tribes or races to 
minimize the danger of combination in the event of mutiny. 
Here and there in East Africa one can utilize ox wagons, 
or pack trains of donkeys; but for a considerable expedition 
it is still best to use a safari of native porters, of the type 
by which the commerce and exploration of the country have 



THROUGH THE PLEISTOCENE 



23 



always been carried on. The backbone of such a safari is 
generally composed of Swahili, the coast men, negroes who 
have acquired the Moslem religion, together with a partially 
Arabicized tongue and a strain of Arab blood from the 
Arab warriors and traders who have been dominant in the 
coast towns for so many centuries. It was these Swahili 
trading caravans, under Arab leadership, which, in their 
quest for ivory and slaves, trod out the routes which the 




up in line to greet us 

fifteen askaris, the second the porters with their headmen 

by Ed)iiu)ul Heller 



early white explorers followed. Without their work as a 
preliminary the work of the white explorers could not have 
been done; and it was the Swahili porters themselves who 
rendered this work itself possible. To this day every hunter, 
trader, missionary, or explorer must use either a Swahili 
safari or one modelled on the Swahili basis. The part 
played by the white-topped ox wagon in the history of South 
Africa, and by the camel caravan in North Africa, has been 
played in middle Africa by the files of strong, patient, 
childlike savages, who have borne the burdens of so many 
masters and employers hither and thither, through and 
across, the dark heart of the continent. 



21 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

Equatorial Africa is in most places none too healthy a 
place for the white man, and he must care for himself as he 
would scorn to do in the lands of pine and birch and frosty 
weather. Camping in the Rockies or the North Woods 
can with advantage be combined with "roughing it"; and 
the early pioneers of the West, the explorers, prospectors, 
and hunters, who always roughed it, were as hardy as bears, 
and lived to a hale old age, if Indians and accidents per- 




Our first camp, Kapiti Plains station, on a bare, dry 

From a photograph 

mitted. But in tropic Africa a lamentable proportion of 
the early explorers paid in health or life for the hardships 
they endured; and throughout most of the country no man 
can long rough it, in the Western and Northern sense, 
with impunity. 

At Kapiti Plains our tents, our accommodations gener- 
ally, seemed almost too comfortable for men who knew 
camp life only on the Great Plains, in the Rockies, and in 
the North Woods. My tent had a fly which was to protect 
it from the great heat; there was a little rear extension In 
which I bathed — a hot bath, never a cold bath, is almost a 
tropic necessity; there was a ground canvas, of vital mo- 



THROUGH THE PLEIST0CP:NE 25 

ment in a land of ticks, jiggers, and scorpions; and a cot 
to sleep on, so as to be raised from the ground. Quite a 
contrast to life on the round-up! Then I had two tent boys 
to see after my belongings, and to wait at table as well as in 
the tent. Ali, a Mohammedan mulatto (Arab and negro), 
was the chief of the two, and spoke some English, while 
under him was "Bill," a speechless black boy; Ali being 
particularly faithful and efficient. Two other Moham- 




plain covered with brown and withered grass 
by Edmund Heller 

medan negroes, clad like the askaris, reported to me as my 
gun-bearers, Muhamed and Bakari; seemingly excellent 
men, loyal and enduring, no trackers, but with keen eyes 
for game, and the former speaking a little English. My 
two horse boys, or saises, were both pagans. One, Hamisi, 
must have had in his veins Galla or other non-negro blood; 
derived from the Hamitic, or bastard Semitic, or at least 
non-negro, tribes which, pushing slowly and fitfully south- 
ward and south-westward among the negro peoples, have 
created an intricate tangle of ethnic and linguistic types 
from the middle Nile to far south of the equator. Hamisi 
always wore a long feather in one of his sandals, the only 



26 AFRICAN GA^IE TRAILS 

ornament he affected. The other sais was a silent, gentle- 
mannered black heathen; his name was Simba, a lion, 
and as I shall later show he was not unworthy of it. The 
two horses for which these men cared were stout, quiet 
little beasts; one, a sorrel, I named Tranquillity, and the 
other, a brown, had so much the coblike build of a zebra 
that we christened him Zebra-shape. One of Kermit's 
two horses, by the way, was more romantically named after 
Huandaw, the sharp-eared steed of the Mabinogion. Cun- 
inghame, lean, sinewy, bearded, exactly the type of hunter 
and safari manager that one would wish for such an ex- 
pedition as ours, had ridden up with us on the train, and at 
the station we met Tarlton, and also two settlers of the 
neighborhood. Sir Alfred Pease and Mr. Clifford Hill. 
Hill was an Africander. He and his cousin, Harold Hill, 
after serving through the South African war, had come to 
the new country of British East Africa to settle, and they 
represented the ideal type of settler for taking the lead in the 
spread of empire. They were descended from the English 
colonists who came to South Africa in 1820; they had never 
been in England, and neither had Tarlton. It was exceed- 
ingly interesting to meet these Australians and Africanders, 
who typified in their lives and deeds the greatness of the 
English Empire, and yet had never seen England. 

As for Sir Alfred, Kermit and I were to be his guests 
for the next fortnight, and we owe primarily to him, to his 
mastery of hunting craft, and his unvarying and generous 
hospitality and kindness, the pleasure and success of our 
introduction to African hunting. His life had been one 
of such varied interest as has only been possible in our own 
generation. He had served many years in Parliament; 
he had for some years been a magistrate in a peculiarly re- 
sponsible post in the Transvaal; he had journeyed and 
hunted and explored in the northern Sahara, in the Soudan, 
in Somaliland, in Abyssinia; and now he was ranching 
in East Africa. A singularly good rider and one of the best 
game shots I have ever seen, it would have been impossible 



I 



THROUGH THE PLEISTOCENE 



27 



to have found a kinder host or a hunter better fitted to 
teach us how to begin our work with African big game. 

At Kapiti station there was httle beyond the station 
buildings, a "compound" or square enclosure in which 
there were many natives, and an Indian store. The last 
was presided over by a turbaned Mussulman, the agent of 
other Indian traders who did business in Machakos-boma, 




I'orters and their tents 
From a photograph by J. A Iden Loring 



a native village a dozen miles distant; the means of com- 
munication being two-wheeled carts, each drawn by four 
humped oxen, driven by a wellnigh naked savage. 

For forty-eight hours we were busy arranging our out- 
fit; and the naturalists took much longer. The provisions 
were those usually included in an African hunting or ex- 
ploring trip, save that, in memory of my days in the West, I 
included in each provision box a few cans of Boston baked 
beans, California peaches, and tomatoes. We had plenty 



28 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

of warm bedding, for the nights are cold at high ahitudes, 
even under the equator. While hunting I wore heavy 
shoes, with hobnails or rubber soles; khaki trousers, the 
knees faced with leather, and the legs buttoning tight from 
the knee to below the ankle, to avoid the need of leggings; 
a khaki-colored army shirt; and a sun helmet, which I 
wore in deference to local advice, instead of my beloved 
and far more convenient slouch hat. My rifles were an 
army Springfield, 30-calibre, stocked and sighted to suit 
myself; a Winchester 405; and a double-barrelled 500-450 
Holland, a beautiful weapon presented to me by some 
English friends.* 

Kermit's battery was of the same type, except that in- 
stead of a Springfield he had another Winchester shooting 
the army ammunition, and his double-barrel was a Rigby. 
In addition I had a Fox No. 12 shot-gun; no better gun 
was ever made. 

There was one other bit of impedimenta, less usual for 
African travel, but perhaps almost as essential for real en- 
joyment even on a h-unting trip, if it is to be of any length. 

* Mr. E. N. Buxton took the lead in the matter when he heard that I intended 
making a trip after big game in Africa. I received the rifle at the White House, 
while I was President. Inside the case was the following hst of donors: 

LIST OF ZOOLOGISTS AND SPORTSMEN WHO ARE DONORS OF A 
DOUBLE ELEPHANT RIFLE TO THE HON. THEODORE 
ROOSEVELT, PRESIDENT U. S. A. 

IX RECOGNITION OF HIS SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE PRESERVATION OF SPECIES 

BY MEANS OF NATIONAL PARKS AND FOREST RESERVES, 

AND BY OTHER MEANS 

E. N. Buxton, Esq. 

Rt. Hon. Lord Avebury, D.C.L. ("The Pleasures of Life," etc.) 

Major-Gen. Sir F. Reginald Wingate, K.C.B. (Governor-General of thfi 

Soudan.) 
Sir Edmund G. Loder, Bart. 
Hon. N. C. Rothschild. 

The Earl of Lonsd.\le. (Master of Hounds.) 
Sir R. G. H.a.rvey, Bart. 

The Rt. Hon. Lord Curzon of Kedleston, G.C.S.I., G.C.I.E. 
St. George Littledale, Esq. 

Dr. p. Chalmers Mitchell, F.R.S., F.Z.S. (Secretary of the Zoological Soc.) 
C. E. Green, Esq. (Master of Essex Hounds.) 



I 



THROUGH THE PLEISTOCENE i^j) 

This was the "Pigskin Library," so called because most 
of the books were bound in pigskin. They were carried 
in a light aluminum and oil-cloth case, which, with its con- 
tents, weighed a little less than sixty pounds, making a 
load for one porter. Including a few volumes carried in 
the various bags, so that I might be sure always to have one 
with me, and Gregorovius, read on the voyage outward, 
the list was as printed in Appendix F. 

It represents in part Kermit's taste, in part mine; and, 
I need hardly say, it also represents in no way all the books 
we most care for, but merely those which, for one reason 
or another, we thought we should like to take on this par- 
ticular trip. 

I used my Whitman tree army saddle and my army 
field-glasses; but, in addition, for studying the habits of 
the game, I carried a telescope given me on the boat by a 
fellow-traveller and big-game hunter, an Irish hussar cap- 
tain from India — and incidentally I am out in my guess if 
this same Irish hussar captain be not worth watching 
should his country ever again be engaged in war. I had 

F. C. Selous, Esq. ("A Hunter's Wanderings," etc.) 

CouxT Bllxher. 

Lieut. -Col. C. Delme R.adcliffe, C.M.G., M.V'.O. 

Maurice Egertox, Esq. 

Lord Desborough, C.V.O. 

C.^PTAix ^L McNeill. 

Claude H. Tritton, Esq. 

J. Turner-Turner, Esq. 

Hon. L. W. Rothschild, ^LI^ 

Rt. Hon. Sir E. Grey, Bart., M.P. (Foreign Secretary and author of "Dry 

Fly Fishing.") 
Sir M. de C. Findlay, C.M.G. (British Minister at Dresden.) 
C. Phillipps-Wolley, Esq., P'.R.G.S. ("Sport in the Caucasus.") 
Rt. Hon. Sir G. O. Trevelyan, Bart., D.C.L. ("The American Revolution.") 
Warburton Pike, Esq. 
Sir Wm. E. Garstin, G.C.M.G. 

His Gr.ace the Duke of Bedford, K.G. ("A Great Estate.") 
Her Gr.a^ce the Duchess of Bedford. 
Lord Brassey, G.C.B., ^LV.O. (Owner of The Sunbeam.) 
Hon. T. a. Br.\ssey. (Editor of the Naval Annual.) 
Rhys Williams, Esq. 
Major-Gen. A. A. A. Kinloch, C.B. ("Large Game in Thibet.") 



30 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

a very ingenious beam or scale for weighing game, designed 
and presented to me by my friend, Mr, Thompson Seton. 
I had a sHcker for wet weather, an army overcoat, and a 
mackinaw jacket for cold, if I had to stay out overnight in 
the mountains. In my pockets I carried, of course, a knife, 
a compass, and a water-proof match-box. Finally, just be- 
fore leaving home, I had been sent, for good luck, a gold- 
mounted rabbit's foot, by Mr. John L. Sullivan, at one time 
ring champion of the world. 

Our camp was on a bare, dry plain, covered with brown 
and withered grass. At most hours of the day we could 
see round about, perhaps a mile or so distant, or less, the 
game feeding. South of the track the reserve stretched for 
a long distance; north it went for but a mile, just enough to 
prevent thoughtless or cruel people from shooting as they 
went by in the train. There was very little water; what 
we drank, by the way, was carefully boiled. The drawback 



Sir Wm. Lee-Warner, K. C.S.I. ("The Protected Princes of India.") 

The Rt. Rev. the Lord Bishop of London. 

Major-Gen. Dalrymple White. 

Colonel Claude Cane. 

Rt. Hon. Sydney Buxton, M.P. (Postmaster General, "Fishing and Shooting.") 

Major C. E. Radclyffe, D.S.O. 

Sir a. E. Pease, Bart. ("Cleveland Hounds.") 

Sir H. H. Johnston, K.C.B., G.C.M.G. ("The Uganda Protectorate.") 

Abel Chapman, Esq. ("Wild Spain.") 

J. G. MiLLAis, Esq., F.Z.S. ("A Breath from the Veldt.") 

E. Lort-Phillips, Esq. (Author of ornithological works.) 
R. Kearton, Esq., F.Z.S. ("Wild Nature's Ways.") 

J. H. Gurney, Esq., F.Z.S. (Works on ornithology.) 

F. J. Jackson, C.B., C.M.G., Lieut.-Governor East African Protectorate. 

("Big Game," Badminton Library.) 
CoL. Sir F. Lugard, K.C.M.G., C.B., D.S.O. 
Lady Lugard. ("A Tropical Dependency.") 
Sir Clement L. Hill, K.C.B., M.P. (Late Head of the African Department; 

Foreign O.) 
Sir H. Seton-Karr, M.P., C.M.G. ("My Sporting Holidays.") 
Captain Boyd Alexander. ("From the Niger to the Nile.") 
Sir J. Kirk, K.C.B., G.C.M.G. (Dr. Livingstone's companion, 1858-64.) 
Moreton Frewen, Esq. 
The Earl of Warwick. 

P. L. Sclater, Esq., D.Sc, Ph.D. (Late Sec. Zool. Soc.) 
Col. J. H. Patterson, D.S.O. ("The Man-Eaters of Tsavo.") 



THROUGH THE PLEISTOCENE 



31 



to the camp, and to 'all this plains region, lay in the ticks, 
which swarmed, and were a scourge to man and beast. 
Every evening the saises picked them by hundreds off 
each horse; and some of our party were at times so bitten 
by the noisome little creatures that they could hardly sleep 
at night, and in one or two cases the man was actually laid 
up for a couple of days; and two of our horses ultimately 
got tick fever, but recovered. 

In mid-afternoon of our third day in this camp we at 
last had matters in such shape that Kermit and I could 




My first " tommy '' (Thomson's gazellej 
From a photograph by Edviuiid Heller 



begin our hunting; and forth we rode, he with Hill, I with 
Sir Alfred, each accompanied by his gun-bearers and sais, 
and by a few porters to carry in the game. For two or 
three miles our little horses shuffled steadily northward 
across the desolate flats of short grass until the ground 
began to rise here and there into low hills, or koppies, with 
rock-strewn tops. It should have been the rainy season, 
the season of "the big rains"; but the rains were late, as 
the parched desolation of the landscape bore witness; nev- 
ertheless there were two or three showers that afternoon. 
We soon began to see game, but the flatness of the country 
and the absence of all cover made stalking a matter of difli- 



32 AFRICAN CxAME TRAILS 

culty; the only bushes were a few sparsely scattered mimo- 
sas; stunted things, two or three feet high, scantily leaved, 
but abounding in bulbous swellings on the twigs, and in 
long, sharp spikes of thorns. There were herds of harte- 
beest and wildebeest, and smaller parties of beautiful ga- 
zelles. The last were of two kinds, named severally after 
their discoverers, the explorers Grant and Thomson; many 
of the creatures of this region commemorate the men — 
Schilling, Jackson, Neuman, Kirke, Chanler, Abbot — ■ 
who first saw and hunted them and brought them to the 
notice of the scientific world. The Thomson's gazelles, or 
Tommies as they are always locally called, are pretty, alert 
little things, half the size of our prongbuck; their big- 
brothers, the Grant's, are among the most beautiful of 
all antelopes, being rather larger than a whitetail deer, 
with singularly graceful carriage, while the old bucks carry 
long lyre-shaped horns. 

Distances are deceptive on the bare plains under the 
African sunlight. I saw a fine Grant, and stalked him in 
a rain squall; but. the bullets from the little Springfield 
fell short as he raced away to safety; I had underestimated 
the range. Then I shot, for the table, a good buck of the 
smaller gazelle, at two hundred and twenty-five yards; the 
bullet went a little high, breaking his back above the 
shoulders. 

But what I really wanted were two good specimens, bull 
and cow, of the wildebeest. These powerful, ungainly 
beasts^ a variety of the brindled gnu or blue wildebeest of 
South Africa, are interesting creatures of queer, eccentric 
habits. With their shaggy manes, heavy forequarters, and 
generally bovine look, they remind one somewhat of our 
bison, at a distance, but of course they are much less bulky, 
a big old bull in prime condition rarely reaching a weight of 
seven hundred pounds. They are beasts of the open plains, 
ever alert and wary; the cows, with their calves, and one or 
more herd bulls, keep in parties of several score; the old 
bulls, singly, or two or three together, keep by themselves, 




A herd of zebra and hartebeest 

One of the interesting features of African wild life is the close association and companionship 

so often seen between two totally different species of game 

From photoiiraphs !&lt;y KcriiiH Ronse7'cU 



34 



AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 



or with herds of zebra, hartebeest, or gazelle; for one of 
the interesting features of African wild life is the close asso- 
ciation and companionship so often seen between totally 
different species of game. Wildebeest are as savage as they 
are suspicious; when wounded they do not hesitate to charge 
a man who comes close, although of course neither they nor 




Head of the wildebeest bull shot by Mr. Roosevelt 
From a thoiograph hy Ediiiuiid Heller 

any other antelopes can be called dangerous when in a wild 
state, any more than moose or other deer can be called dan- 
gerous; when tame, however, wildebeest are very dangerous 
indeed, more so than an ordinary domestic bull. The wild, 
queer-looking creatures prance and rolick and cut strange 
capers when a herd first makes up its mind to flee from a 
stranger's approach; and even a solitary bull will sometimes 
plunge and buck as it starts to gallop off; while a couple 



1 




Mr. Roosevelt in Africa in his hunting costume 
FrotK a pkoio£rafih by Edmund Heller 



36 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

of bulls, when the herd is frightened, may reheve their feel- 
ings by a moment's furious battle, occasionally dropping to 
their knees before closing. At this time, the end of April, 
there were little calves with the herds of cows; but in many 
places in equatorial Africa the various species of antelopes 
seem to have no settled rutting time or breeding time; at 
least we saw calves of all ages. 

Our hunt after wildebeest this afternoon was successful; 
but though by velt law each animal was mine, because I 
hit it first, yet in reality the credit was communistic, so to 
speak, and my share was properly less than that of others. 
I first tried to get up to a solitary old bull, and after a good 
deal of manoeuvring, and by taking advantage of a second 
rain squall, I got a standing shot at him at four hundred 
yards, and hit him, but too far back. Although keeping 
a good distance away, he tacked and veered so, as he ran, 
that by much running myself I got various other shots at 
him, at very long range, but missed them all, and he finally 
galloped over a distant ridge, his long tail switching, seem- 
ingly not much the worse. We followed on horseback; 
for I hate to let any wounded thing escape to sufi^er. But 
meanwhile he had run into view of Kermit; and Kermit — 
who is of an age and build which better fit him for suc- 
cessful breakneck galloping over unknown country dotted 
with holes and bits of rotten ground — took up the chase 
with enthusiasm. Yet it was sunset, after a run of six or 
eight miles, when he finally ran into and killed the tough old 
bull, which had turned to bay, snorting and tossing its horns. 

Meanwhile I managed to get within three hundred 
and fifty yards of a herd, and picked out a large cow which 
was unaccompanied by a calf. Again my bullet went too 
far back; and I could not hit the animal at that distance 
as it ran. But after going half a mile it lay down, and 
would have been secured without difficulty If a wretched 
dog had not run forward and put it up; my horse was a 
long way back, but Pease, who had been looking on at a 
distance, was mounted, and sped after it. By the time I 



THROUGH THE PLEIST0CP:NE 37 

had reached my horse Pease was out of sight; but riding 
hard for some miles I overtook him, just before the sun 
went down, standing by the cow which he had ridden down 
and slain. It was long after nightfall before we reached 
camp, ready for a hot bath and a good supper. As always 
thereafter with anything we shot, we used the meat for 
food and preserved the skins for the National Museum. 
Both the cow and the bull were fat and in fine condition; 
but they were covered with ticks, especially wherever the 
skin was bare. Around the eyes the loathsome creatures 
swarmed so as to make complete rims, like spectacles; 
and in the armpits and the groin they were massed so that 
they looked like barnacles on an old boat. It is astonishing 
that the game should mind them so little; the wildebeest 
evidently dreaded far more the biting flies which hung 
around them; and the maggots of the bot-flies in their 
nostrils must have been a sore torment. Nature is mer- 
ciless indeed. 

The next day we rode some sixteen miles to the beautiful 
hills of Kitanga, and for over a fortnight were either Pease's 
guests at his farm — ranch, as we should call it in the West 
— or were on safari under his guidance. 



CHAPTER II 

ON AN EAST AFRICAN RANCH 

The house at which we were staying stood on the beau- 
tiful Kitanga hills. They were so named after an English- 
man, to whom the natives had given the name of Kitanga; 
some years ago, as we were told, he had been killed by a 
lion near where the ranch house now stood; and we were 
shown his grave in the little Machakos graveyard. The 
house was one story high, clean and comfortable, with a 
veranda running round three sides; and on the veranda 
were lion skins and the skull of a rhinoceros. From the 
house we looked over hills and wide lonely plains; the 
green valley below, with its flat-topped acacias, was very 
lovely; and in the evening we could see, scores of miles 
away, the snowy summit of mighty Kilimanjaro turn 
crimson in the setting sun. The twilights were not long; 
and when night fell, stars new to northern eyes flashed 
glorious in the sky. Above the horizon hung the Southern 
Cross, and directly opposite in the heavens was our old 
familiar friend the Wain, the Great Bear, upside down and 
pointing to a North Star so low behind a hill that we could 
not see it. It is a dry country, and we saw it in the second 
year of a drought; yet I believe it to be a country of high 
promise for settlers of white race. In many ways it reminds 
one rather curiously of the great plains of the West, where 
they slope upward to the foot-hills of the Rockies. It is a 
white man's country. Although under the equator, the 
altitude is so high that the nights are cool, and the re- 
gion as a whole is very healthy. I saw many children, of 
the Boer immigrants, of English settlers, even of American 
missionaries, and they looked sound and well. Of course, 
there was no real identity in any feature; but again and 
again the landscape struck me by its general likeness to the 

38 



ON AN EAST AFRICAN RANCH 



39 



cattle country I knew so well. As my horse shuffled forward, 
under the bright, hot sunlight, across the endless flats or 
gently rolling slopes of brown and withered grass, I might 
have been on the plains anywhere, from Texas to Montana; 
the hills were like our Western buttes; the half-dry water- 




sir Alfred, Lady, and Miss Pease, on ranch steps with rhino and lion 

skulls and lion skins 

From a pltotograph by Kermit Roosevelt 

courses were fringed with trees, just as if they had been 
the Sandy, or the Dry, or the Beaver, or the Cottonwood, 
or any of the multitude of creeks that repeat these and 
similar names, again and again, from the Panhandle to the 
Saskatchewan. Moreover a Westerner, far better than an 
Easterner, could see the possibilities of the country. There 
should be storage reservoirs in the hills and along the rivers 



40 AFRICAN (iAME TRAILS 

— in my judgment built by the government, and paid for 
by the water-users in the shape of water-rents — and irriga- 
tion ditches; with the water stored and used there would 
be an excellent opening for small farmers, for the settlers, 
the actual home-makers, who, above all others, should be 
encouraged to come into a white man's country like this of 
the highlands of East Africa. Even as it is, many settlers 
do well; it is hard to realize that right under the equator 
the conditions are such that wheat, potatoes, strawberries, 
apples, all flourish. No new country is a place for weak- 
lings; but the right kind of man, the settler who makes a 
success in similar parts of our own West, can do well in 
East Africa; while a man vv^^ith money can undoubtedly do 
very well indeed; and incidentally both men will be lead- 
ing their lives under conditions peculiarly attractive to a 
certain kind of spirit. It means hard work, of course; 
but success generally does imply hard work. 

The plains were generally covered only with the thick 
grass on which the great herds of game fed; here and there 
small thorn-trees grew upon them, but usually so small 
and scattered as to give no shelter or cover. By the occa- 
sional watercourses the trees grew more thickly, and also 
on the hills and in the valleys between. Most of the trees 
were mimosas, or of similar kind, usually thorny; but there 
were giant cactus-like euphorbias, shaped like candela- 
bra, and named accordingly; and on the higher hills fig- 
trees, wild olives, and many others whose names I do not 
know, but some of which were stately and beautiful. Many 
of the mimosas were in bloom, and covered with sweet- 
smelling yellow blossoms. There were many flowers. On 
the dry plains there were bushes of the color and size of 
our own sage-brush, covered with flowers like morning- 
glories. There were also wild sweet-peas, on which the 
ostriches fed; as they did on another plant with a lilac 
flower of a faint heliotrope fragrance. Among the hills 
there were masses of singularly fragrant flowers like pink 
jessamines, growing on bushes sometimes fifteen feet high 



ON AN EAST AFRICAN RANCH 41 

or over. There were white flowers that smek hke narcissus, 
blue flowers, red lilies, orange tiger-lilies, and many others 
of many kinds and colors, while here and there in the pools 
of the rare rivers grew the sweet-scented purple lotus-lily. 

There was an infinite variety of birds, small and large, 
dull-colored and of the most brilliant plumage. For the 
most part they either had no names at all or names that 
meant nothing to us. There were glossy starlings of many 
kinds; and scores of species of weaver finches, some brill- 
iantly colored, others remarkable because of the elaborate 
nests they built by communities among the trees. There 
were many kinds of shrikes, some of them big, parti-colored 
birds, almost like magpies, and with a kestrel-like habit of 
hovering in the air over one spot; others very small and 
prettily colored. There was a little red-billed finch with its 
outer tail feathers several times the length of its head and 
body. There was a little emerald cuckoo, and a tiny thing, 
a barbet, that looked exactly like a kingfisher four inches 
long. Eared owls flew up from the reeds and grass. There 
were big, restless, wonderfully colored plantain-eaters in 
the woods; and hornbills, with strange swollen beaks. A 
true lark, colored like our meadow-lark (to which it is in 
no way related) sang from bushes; but the clapper-lark 
made its curious clapping sounds (apparently with its wings 
like a ruffed grouse) while it zigzagged in the air. Little 
pipits sang overhead like our Missouri skylarks. There 
were night-jars; and doves of various kinds, one of which 
uttered a series of notes slightly resembling the call of our 
whippoorwill or chuckwills widow. The beautiful little sun- 
birds were the most gorgeous of all. Then there were bus- 
tards, great and small, and snake-eating secretary birds, 
on the plains; and francolins, and African spurfowl with 
brilliant naked throats, and sand grouse that flew in packs 
uttering guttural notes. The wealth of bird life was be- 
wildering. There was not much bird music, judged by 
the standards of a temperate climate; but the bulbuls, and 
one or two warblers, sang very sweetly. The naturalists 



42 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

caught shrews and mice in their traps; mole rats with vel- 
vety fur, which burrowed like our pocket gophers; rats 
that lived in holes like those of our kangaroo rat; and one 
mouse that was striped like our striped gopher. There were 
conies among the rocks on the hills; they looked like squat, 
heavy woodchucks, but their teeth were somewhat like 
those of a wee rhinoceros, and they had little hoof-like nails 
instead of claws. There were civets and wild-cats and 
things like a small mongoose. But the most interesting 
mammal we saw was a brilliantly colored yellow and blue, 
or yellow and slate, bat, which we put up one day while 
beating through a ravine. It had been hanging from a 
mimosa twig, and it flew well in the strong sunlight, look- 
ing like some huge, parti-colored butterfly. 

It was a settled country, this in which we did our 
first hunting, and for this reason all the more interesting. 
The growth and development of East and Middle Africa 
are phenomena of such absorbing interest, that I was de- 
lighted at the chance to see the parts where settlement 
has already begun before plunging into the absolute wilder- 
ness. There was much to remind one of conditions in 
Montana and Wyoming thirty years ago; the ranches 
planted down among the hills and on the plains still teem- 
ing with game, the spirit of daring adventure everywhere 
visible, the hope and the heart-breaking disappointment, the 
successes and the failures. But the problem offered by the 
natives bore no resemblance to that once offered by the 
presence of our tribes of horse Indians, few in numbers 
and incredibly formidable in war. The natives of East 
Africa are numerous; many of them are agricultural or pas- 
toral peoples after their own fashion; and even the bravest 
of them, the warlike Masai, are in no way formidable as 
our Indians were formidable when they went on the war- 
path. The ranch country I first visited was in what was 
once the domain of the Wakamba, and in the greater part 
of it the tribes still dwell. They are in most ways primitive 
savages, with an imperfect and feeble social, and therefore 



•*««-.' 







Mr. Roosevelt and Medlicott at the spot where we nooned on the first (unsuccessful) day 
of lion hunting in the l.ucania Donga 
From a pitotograph by Kermit Roosevelt 



44 AFRICAN &lt;iAME TRAILS 

military, organization; they live in small communities under 
their local chiefs; they file their teeth, and though they wear 
blankets in the neighborhood of the whites, these blankets 
are often cast aside; even when the blanket is worn, it is often 
in such fashion as merely to accentuate the otherwise abso- 
lute nakedness of both sexes. Yet these savages are cattle- 
keepers and cattle-raisers, and the women do a good deal of 
simple agricultural work; unfortunately, they are waste- 
fully destructive of the forests. The chief of each littlf vil- 
lage is recognized as the official headman by the British 
official, is given support, and is required to help the authori- 
ties keep peace and stamp out cattle disease — the two most 
important functions of government so far as the Wakamba 
themselves are concerned. All the tribes have their herds 
of black, brown, and white goats, of mottled sheep, and 
especially of small humped cattle. The cattle form their 
pride and joy. During the day each herd is accompanied 
by the herdsmen, and at night it is driven within its boma, 
or circular fence of thorn-bushes. Except for the milk, 
which they keep in their foul, smoky calabashes, the natives 
really make no use of their cattle; they do not know how 
to work them, and they never eat them even in time of 
starvation. When there is prolonged drought and conse- 
quent failure of crops, the foolish creatures die by the hun- 
dreds when they might readily be saved if they v^'ere willing 
to eat the herds which they persist in treating as ornaments 
rather than as made for use. 

Many of the natives work for the settlers, as cattle- 
keepers, as ostrich-keepers, or, after a fashion, as laborers. 
The settlers evidently much prefer to rely upon the natives 
for unskilled labor rather than see coolies from Hindostan 
brought into the country. At Sir Alfred Pease's ranch, as 
at most of the other farms of the neighborhood, we found 
little Wakamba settlements. Untold ages separated em- 
ployers and employed; yet those that I saw seemed to get 
on well together. The Wakamba are as yet not sufficiently 
advanced to warrant their sharing in the smallest degree in 



ON AN EAST AFRICAN RANCH 



45 



the common government; the "just consent of the governed" 
in their case, if taken hterally, would mean idleness, famine, 
and endless internecine warfare. They cannot govern them- 
selves from within; therefore they must be governed from 
without; and their need is met in highest fashion by firm 
and just control, of the kind that on the whole they are 




Tree with Wakainba beehives, Kitaiiga 
From a photograph by Edtniaid Hello 

now getting. At Kitanga the natives on the place some- 
times worked about the house; and they took care of the 
stock. The elders looked after the mild little humped cat- 
tle — bulls, steers, and cows; and the children, often the 
merest toddlers, took naturally to guarding the parties of 
pretty little calves, during the daytime, when they were 
separated from their mothers. It was an ostrich-farm, too; 
and in the morning and evening we would meet the great 
birds, as they went to their grazing-grounds or returned to 
the ostrich boma, mincing along with their usual air of 
foolish stateliness, convoyed by two or three boys, each 



46 



AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 



with a red blanket, a throwing stick, copper wire round his 
legs and arms, and perhaps a feather stuck in his hair. 

There were a number of ranches in the neighborhood — 
using "neighborhood" in the large Western sense, for they 
were many miles apart. The Hills, Clifford and Harold, 
were Africanders; they knew the country, and were work- 




Percival and his oxen starting off for the giraffes 
From a photograph by Kerinit Roosevelt 

ins; hard and doing well; and in the midst of their work 
they spared the time to do their full part in insuring a suc- 
cessful hunt to me, an entire stranger. All the settlers I 
met treated me with the same large and thoughtful courtesy 
— and what fine fellows they were! And their wives even 
finer. At Bondoni was Percival, a tall sinewy man, a fine 
rider and shot; like so many other men whom I met, he 
wore merely a helmet, a flannel shirt, short breeches or 
trunks, and puttees and boots, leaving the knee entirely 
bare. I shall not soon forget seeing him one day, as he 
walked beside his twelve-ox team, cracking his long whip, 
while in the big wagon sat pretty Mrs. Percival with a puppy, 
and a little cheetah cub, which we had found and presented 



ON AN EAST AFRICAN RANCH 



47 



to her and which she was taming. They all — Sir Alfred, 
the Hills, every one — behaved as if each was my host and 
felt it peculiarly incumbent on him to give me a good time; 
and among these hosts one who did very much for me was 
Captain Arthur Slatter. I was his guest at Kilimakiu, 
where he was running an ostrich-farm; he had lost his 
right hand, yet he was an 
exceedingly good game 
shot both with his light 
and his heavy rifles. 

At Kitanga, Sir Al- 
fred's place, two Boers 
were working, Messrs. 
Prinsloo and Klopper. 
We forgathered, of 
course, as I too was of 
Dutch ancestry; they 
were strong, upstanding 
men, good mechanics, 
good masons, and Prins- 
loo spoke English well. I 
afterward stopped at the 
farm of Klopper's father, 
and at the farm of an- 
other Boer named Loijs; 

and I met other Boers while out hunting— Erasmus, Botha, 
Joubert, Meyer. They were descendants of the Voortrek- 
kers with the same names who led the hard-fighting farmers 
northward from the Cape seventy years ago; and were 
kinsfolk of the men who since then have made these names 
honorably known throughout the world. There must of 
course be many Boers who have gone backward under the 
stress of a hard and semi-savage life; just as in our com- 
munities of the frontier, the backwoods, and the lonely 
mountains, there are shiftless ''poor whites" and ''mean 
whites/' mingled with the sturdy men and women who have 
laid deep the foundations of our national greatness. But 



r 


^ 

^ 


^M 


^/# 


J 






1^^^-^^ 








ST.. 


m. ■' 


/ 



Sir Alfred with cheetah cub, Botha 
From a photograph by Kermit Roosevelt 



48 AFRICAN (iAME TRAILS 

personally I happened not to come across these shiftless 
"mean white" Boers. Those that I met, both men and 
women, were of as good a type as any one could wish for 
in his own countrymen or could admire in another nation- 
ality. They fulfilled the three prime requisites for any 
race: they worked hard, they could fight hard at need, and 
they had plenty of children. These are the three essential 
qualities in any and every nation; they are by no means 
all-sufficient in themselves, and there is need that many 
others should be added to them; but the lack of any one of 
them is fatal, and cannot be made good by the presence 
of any other set of attributes. 

It was pleasant to see the good terms on which Boer and 
Briton met. Many of the English settlers whose guest I 
was, or with whom I hunted — the Hills, Captain Slatter, 
Heatley, Judd — had fought through the South African war; 
and so had all the Boers I met. The latter had been for 
the most part members of various particularly hard-fighting 
commandos; when the war closed they felt very bitterly, 
and wished to avoid living under the British flag. Some 
moved West and some East; those I met were among the 
many hundreds, indeed thousands, who travelled northward 
— a few overland, most of them by water — to German East 
Africa. But in the part in which they happened to settle 
they were decimated by fever, and their stock perished of 
cattle sickness; and most of them had again moved north- 
ward, and once more found themselves under the British 
flag. They were being treated precisely on an equality with 
the British settlers; and every well-wisher to his kind, and 
above all every well-wisher to Africa, must hope that the 
men who in South Africa fought so valiantly against one 
another, each for the right as he saw it, will speedily grow 
into a companionship of mutual respect, regard, and con- 
sideration such as that which, for our inestimable good fort- 
une, now knits closely together in our own land the men 
who wore the blue and the men who wore the gray and 
their descendants. There could be no better and manlier 



ON AN EAST AFRICAN RANCH 



49 



people than those, both Enghsh and Dutch, who are at 
this moment engaged in the great and difficuk task of add- 
ing East Africa to the domain of civihzation; their work 
is bound to be hard enough anyhow; and it would be a 
lamentable calamity to render it more difficult by keeping 
alive a bitterness which has lost all point and justification, 
or by failing to recognize 
the fundamental virtues, 
the fundamental charac- 
teristics, in which the 
men of the two stocks 
are in reality so much 
alike. 

Messrs. Klopper and 
Loijs, whose farms I vis- 
ited, were doing well; the 
latter, with three of his 
sons, took me out with 
pride to show me the 
dam which they had built 
across a dry watercourse, . 
so as to make a storage 
reservoir when the rains 
came. The houses were 
of stone, and clean and 

comfortable; the floors Klopper and rdnsloo, the two Boers workin'^ 
, . 1 , on Sir Alfred's Ranch 

were covered with the , ^, , ,. ., ^ 

skins of buck and zebra; 

the chairs were home-made, as was most of the other 
furniture; the "rust bunks," or couches, strongly and grace- 
fully shaped, and filled with plaited raw hide, were so 
attractive that I ordered one to take home. There were 
neatly kept little flower-gardens, suffering much from the 
drought; there were ovens and out-buildings; cattle-sheds 
for the humped oxen and the herds of pretty cows and 
calves; the biltong was drying in smoke-houses; there 
were patches of ground in cultivation, for corn and veg- 




50 . AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

etables; and the wild velt came up to the door-sills, and 
the wild game grazed quietly on all sides within sight of 
the houses. It was a very good kind of pioneer life; and 
there could be no better pioneer settlers than Boers such 
as I saw. 

The older men wore full beards, and were spare and 
sinewy. The young men were generally smooth-faced or 
mustached, strongly built, and rather shy. The elder 
women were stout, cordial, motherly housewives; the 
younger were often really pretty. At their houses I was 
received with hearty hospitality, and given coffee or fresh 
milk, while we conversed through the medium of the sons 
or daughters who knew a little English. They all knew 
that I was of Dutch origin, and were much interested when 
I repeated to them the only Dutch I knew, a nursery song 
which, as I told them, had been handed down to me by my 
own forefathers, and which in return I had repeated, so 
many, many times, to my children when they were little. 
It runs as follows, by the way; but I have no idea how the 
words are spelled, as" I have no written copy; it is supposed 
to be sung by the father, who holds the little boy or little 
girl on his knee, and tosses him or her up in the air when 
he comes to the last line: 

Trippa, troppa, tronjes, 

De varken's in de boonjes, 

De koejes in de klaver, 

De paardeen in de haver, 

De eenjes in de water-plass! 

So groot myn kleine (here insert the 

little boy's or little girl's name) wass! 

My pronunciation caused trouble at first; but I think 
they understood me the more readily because doubtless 
their own usual tongue was in some sort a dialect; and 
some of them already knew the song, while they were all 
pleased and amused at my remembering and repeating 
it; and we were speedily on a most friendly footing. 



ON AN EAST AFRICAN RANCH 



51 



The essential identity of interest between the Boer 
and British settlers was shown by their attitude toward 
the district commissioner, Mr. Humphery, who was just 




Heads of first two big lions shot by Mr. Roosevelt 
^ From a photograph by Kermil Roo^ei'elt 

leaving for his biennial holiday, and who dined with us 
in our tent on his way out. From both Boer farmer and 
English settler — and from the American missionaries also — 



52 . AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

I heard praise of Humphery, as a strong man, not in the 
least afraid of either settler or native, but bound to do 
justice to both, and, what was quite as important, sympa- 
thizing with the settlers and knowing and understanding 
their needs. A new country in which white pioneer settlers 
are struggling with the iron difficulties and hardships of 
frontier life is above all others that in which the officials 
should be men having both knowledge and sympathy with 
the other men over whom they are placed and for whom 
they should work. 

My host and hostess. Sir Alfred and Lady Pease, were 
on the best terms with all their neighbors, and their friendly 
interest was returned; now it was the wife of a Boer farmer 
who sent over a basket of flowers, now came a box of 
apples from an English settler on the hills; now Prinsloo 
the Boer stopped to dinner; now the McMillans — Ameri- 
can friends, of whose farm and my stay thereon I shall 
speak later — rode over from their house on the Mua Hills, 
with their guest, Selous, to take lunch. This, by the way, 
was after I had shot my first lions, and I was much pleased 
to be able to show Selous the trophies. 

My gentle-voiced hostess and her daughter had seen 
many strange lands and strange happenings; as was nat- 
ural with a husband and father of such adventure-loving 
nature. They took a keen interest, untinged by the slightest 
nervousness, in every kind of wild creature from lions and 
leopards down. The game was in sight from the veranda 
of the house almost every hour of the day. Early one morn- 
ing, in the mist, three hartebeests came right up to the 
wire fence, two-score yards from the house itself; and the 
black-and-white striped zebra, and ruddy hartebeest, grazed 
or rested through the long afternoons in plain view, on the 
hill-sides opposite. 

It is hard for one who has not himself seen it to realize 
the immense quantities of game to be found on the Kapiti 
Plains and Athi Plains and the hills that bound them. 
The common game of the plains, the animals of which I 



I 



f ^ 



ON AN EAST AFRICAN RANCH 



53 



saw most while at Kitanga and in the neighborhood, were 
the zebra, wildebeest, hartebeest, Grant's gazelle, and 
*' tommies" or Thomson's gazelle; the zebra, and the 
hartebeest, usually known by the Swahili name of kon- 
goni, being by far the most plentiful. Then there were 
impalla, mountain reedbuck, duiker, steinbuck, and dimin- 




Some of the naturalists' porters and skinners 
From n photograph by J. A Men Lorit/g 



utive dikdik. As we travelled and hunted we were hardly 
ever out of sight of game; and on Pease's farm itself there 
were many thousand head; and so there were on Slatter's. 
If wealthy men who desire sport of the most varied and 
interesting kind would purchase farms like these they could 
get, for much less money, many times the interest and 
enjoyment a deer-forest or grouse-moor can afford. 

The wildebeest or gnu were the shyest and least plenti- 
ful, but in some ways the most interesting, because of the 
queer streak of ferocious eccentricity evident in all their 
actions. They were of all the animals those that were most 
exclusively dwellers in the open, where there was neither 



54 &lt; AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

hill nor bush. Their size and their dark bluish hides, some- 
times showing white in the sunlight^ but more often black, 
rendered them more easily seen than any of their com- 
panions. But hardly any plains animal of any size makes 
any effort to escape its enemies by eluding their observa- 
tion. Very much of what is commonly said about ''pro- 
tective coloration" has no basis whatever in fact. Black 
and white are normally the most conspicuous colors in 
nature (and yet are borne by numerous creatures who 
have succeeded well in the struggle for life); but almost 
any tint, or combination of tints, among the grays^ browns 
and duns, harmonizes fairly well with at least some sur- 
roundings, in most landscapes; and in but a few instances 
among the larger mammals, and in almost none among 
those frequenting the open plains, is there the slightest 
reason for supposing that the creature gains any benefit 
whatever from what is loosely called its "protective colora- 
tion." Giraffes, leopards, and zebras, for instance, have 
actually been held up as instances of creatures that are 
"protectingly" colored and are benefited thereby. The 
giraffe is one of the most conspicuous objects in nature, 
and never makes the slightest effort to hide; near by its 
mottled hide is very noticeable, but as a matter of fact, 
under any ordinary circumstances any possible foe trust- 
ing to eyesight would discover the giraffe so far away that 
its coloring would seem uniform, that is, would because of 
the distance be indistinguishable from a general tint which 
really might have a slight protective value. In other words, 
while it is possible that the giraffe's beautifully waved color- 
ing may under certain circumstances, and in an infinitesi- 
mally small number of cases, put it at a slight disadvantage 
in the struggle for life, in the enormous majority of cases — 
a majority so great as to make the remaining cases negligi- 
ble — it has no eftect whatever, one way or the other; and 
it is safe to say that under no conditions is its coloring of 
the slightest value to it as affording it "protection" from 
foes trusting to their eyesight. So it is with the leopard; 



II 



ON AN EAST AFRICAN RANCH 55 

it is undoubtedly much less conspicuous than if it were 
black — and yet the black leopards, the melanistic individ- 
uals, thrive as well as their spotted brothers; while on the 
whole it is probably slightly more conspicuous than if it were 
nearly unicolor, like the American cougar. As compared with 
the cougar's tawny hide the leopard's coloration represents a 
very slight disadvantage, and not an advantage, to the beast; 
but its life is led under conditions which make either the 
advantage or the disadvantage so slight as to be negligible; 
its peculiar coloration is probably in actual fact of hardly 
the slightest service to it from the ** protective" stand-point, 
whether as regards escaping from its enemies or approach- 
ing its prey. It has extraordinary facility in hiding, it is 
a master of the art of stealthy approach; but it is normally 
nocturnal and by night the color of its hide is of no conse- 
quence whatever; while by day, as I have already said, 
its varied coloration renders it slightly more easy to detect 
than is the case with the cougar. 

All of this applies with peculiar force to the zebra, 
which it has also been somewhat the fashion of recent 
years to hold up as an example of "protective coloration." 
As a matter of fact the zebra's coloration is not protective 
at all; on the contrary it is exceedingly conspicuous, and 
under the actual conditions of the zebra's life probably 
never hides it from its foes; the instances to the contrary 
being due to conditions so exceptional that they may be 
disregarded. If any man seriously regards the zebra's 
coloration as "protective/' let him try the experiment of 
wearing a hunting suit of the zebra pattern; he will speed- 
ily be undeceived. The zebra is peculiarly a beast of the 
open plains, and makes no effort ever to hide from the 
observation of its foes. It is occasionally found in open 
forest; and may there now and then escape observation 
simply as any animal of any color — a dun hartebeest or a 
nearly black bushbuck — may escape observation. At a 
distance of over a few hundred yards the zebra's coloration 
ceases to be conspicuous simply because the distance has 



%&gt;/ 



5() AFRICAN (JAME TRAILS 

caused it to lose all its distinctive character — that is, all 
the quality which could possibly make it protective. Near 
by it is always very conspicuous, and if the conditions are 
such that any animal can be seen at all, a zebra will catch 
the eye much more quickly than a Grant's gazelle, for in- 
stance. These gazelles, by the way, although much less 
conspicuously colored than the zebra, bear when young, 
and the females even when adult, the dark side stripe 
which characterizes all sexes and ages of the smaller gazelle, 
the tommy; it is a very conspicuous marking, quite 
inexplicable on any theory of protective coloration. The 
truth is that no game of the plains is helped in any way by 
its coloration in evading its foes and none seeks to escape 
the vision of its foes. The larger game animals of the 
plains are always walking and standing in conspicuous 
places, and never seek to hide or take advantage of cover; 
while, on the contrary, the little grass and bush antelopes, 
like the duiker and steinbuck, trust very much to their 
power of hiding, and endeavor to escape the sight of their 
foes by lying absolutely still, in the hope of not being made 
out against their background. On the plains one sees the 
wildebeest farthest off and with most ease; the zebra and 
hartebeest next; the gazelles last. 

The wildebeest are very wary. While the hunter is 
still a long way off the animal will stop grazing and stand 
with head raised, the heavy shoulders and short neck mak- 
ing it unmistakable. Then, when it makes up its mind to 
allow no closer approach, it brandishes its long tail, springs 
and plunges, runs once or twice in semicircles, and is off, 
the head held much lower than the shoulders, the tail still 
lashing; and now and then a bull may toss up the dust 
with its horns. The herds of cows and calves usually con- 
tain one or two or more bulls; and in addition, dotted here 
and there over the plain, are single bulls or small parties of 
bulls, usually past their prime or not yet full grown. These 
bulls are often found in the company of hartebeests or 
zebras; and stray zebras and hartebeests are often found 



G 



ON AN EAST AFRICAN RANCH .57 

with the wildebeest herds. The stomachs of those I opened 
contained nothing but grass; they are grazers, not browsers. 
The hartebeest are much faster, and if really frightened 
speedily leave their clumsy-looking friends behind; but 
the wildebeest, as I have seen them, are by far the most 
wary. The wildebeest and zebra seemed to me to lie down 
less freely than the hartebeest; but I frequently came on 
herds of both lying down during the heat of the day. Some- 
times part of the herd will stand drowsily erect and the 
rest lie down. Near Kitanga there were three wildebeest 
which were usually found with a big herd of hartebeest, 
and which regularly every afternoon lay down for some 
hours, just as their friends did. The animal has a very 
bovine look; and though called an antelope it is quite 
as close kin to the oxen as it is to many of the other beasts 
also called antelope. The fact is that antelope is not an 
exact term at all, but merely means any hollow-horned 
ruminant which the observer happens to think is not a 
sheep, goat, or ox. When, with Linnaeus, the first serious 
effort at the systematization of living nature began, men 
naturally groped in the effort to see correctly and to ex- 
press what they saw. When they came to describe the 
hollow-horned ruminants, they, of course, already had 
names at hand for anything that looked like one of the 
domestic creatures with which they were familiar; and as 
"antelope" was also already a name of general, though 
vague, currency for some wild creatures, they called every- 
thing an antelope that did not seem to come in one of the 
more familiar domestic categories. Study has shown that 
sheep and goats grade into one another among the wild 
species; and the so-called antelopes include forms differing 
from one another quite as sharply as any of them differ 
from their kinsfolk that are represented in the farm-yard. 

Zebra share with hartebeest the distinction of being 
the most abundant game animal on the plains, throughout 
the whole Athi region. The two creatures are fond of as- 
sociating together, usually in mixed herds; but some- 



58 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

times there will merely be one or two individuals of one 
species in a big herd of the other. They are sometimes, 
though less frequently than the hartebeest, found in open 
bush country; but they live in the open plains by choice. 

I could not find out that they had fixed times for rest- 
ing, feeding, and going to water. They and the harte- 
beests formed the favorite prey of the numerous lions of 
the neighborhood; and I believe that the nights^ even 
the moonlight nights, were passed by both animals under a 
nervous strain of apprehension, ever dreading the attack 
of their arch enemy^ and stampeding from it. Their stam- 
pedes cause the utmost exasperation to the settlers for 
when in terror of the real or imaginary attack of a lion, 
their mad^ heedless rush takes them through a wire fence 
as if it were made of twine and pasteboard. But a few 
months before my arrival a mixed herd of zebra and harte- 
beest, stampeded either by lions or wild dogs, rushed 
through the streets of Nairobi, several being killed by the 
inhabitants, and one of the victims falling just outside the 
Episcopal church. The zebras are nearly pov^erless when 
seized by lions; but they are bold creatures against less 
formidable foes, trusting in their hoofs and their strong 
jaws; they will, when in a herd, drive off hyena or wild 
dogs^ and will turn on hounds^ if the hunter is net near. 
If the lion is abroad in the daytime, they, as well as the 
other game^ seem to realize that he cannot run them down; 
and though they follow his movements with great alertness, 
and keep at a respectful distance, they show no panic. Or- 
dinarily as I saw them they did not seem very shy of men; 
but in this respect all the game displayed the widest differ- 
ences from time to time, without any real cause, that I could 
discern for the difference. At one hour, or on one day the 
zebra and hartebeest would flee from our approach when half 
a mile off; and again they would permit us to come within 
a couple of hundred yards before moving slowly aw ay. On 
two or three occasions at lunch herds of zebra remained for 
half an hour watching us with much curiosity not over a hun- 



ON AN E.\ST AFRICAN UANCil 59 

dred yards off. Once, when we had been vainly beating for 
lions at the foot of the Elukania ridge, at least a thousand 
zebras stood, in herds, on every side of us, throughout 
lunch; they were from two to four hundred yards distant, 
and I was especially struck by the fact that those which 
were to leeward and had our wind were no more alarmed 
than the others. I have seen them water at dawn and sun- 
set, and also in the middle of the day; and I have seen 
them grazing at every hour of the day, although I believe 
most freely in the morning and evening. At noon and until 
the late afternoon those I saw were quite apt to be resting, 
either standing or lying down. They are noisy. Harte- 
beests merely snort or sneeze now and then; but the shrill, 
querulous barking of the "bonte quaha," as the Boers call 
the zebra^ is one of the common sounds of the African plains, 
both by day and night. It is usually represented in books by 
the syllables *'qua-ha-ha"; but of course our letters and syl- 
lables uere not made to represent, and can only in arbitrary 
and conventional fashion represent, the calls of birds and 
mammals; the bark of the bonte quagga or common zebra 
could just as well be represented by the syllables "ba-wa- 
wa," and as a matter of fact it can readily be mistaken for 
the bark of a shrill-voiced dog. After one of a herd has 
been killed by a lion or a hunter its companions are par- 
ticularly apt to keep uttering their cry. Zebras are very 
beautiful creatures, and it was an unending pleasure to 
watch them. I ne\er molested them save to procure speci- 
mens for the museums, or food for the porters, who like 
their rather rank flesh. They were covered with ticks 
like the other game; on the groin, and many of the tender- 
est spots, the odious creatures were in solid clusters; yet the 
zebras were all in high condition, with masses of oily yellow 
fat. One stallion weighed six hundred and fifty pounds. 

The hartebeest — Coke's hartebeest, known locally by 
the Swahili name of kongoni— were at least as plentiful, 
and almost as tame as the zebras. As with the other game 
of equatorial Africa, we found the young of all ages; there 



60 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

seems to be no especial breeding time, and no one period 
among the males corresponding to the rutting season among 
northern animals. The hartebeests were usually insepara- 
ble companions of the zebra; but though they were by pref- 
erence beasts of the bare plain, they were rather more 
often found in open bush than were their striped friends. 
There are in the country numerous ant-hills, which one sees 
in every stage of development, from a patch of bare earth 
with a few funnel-like towers, to a hillock a dozen feet high 
and as many yards in circumference. On these big ant- 
hills one or two kongoni will often post themselves as look- 
outs, and are then almost impossible to approach. The 
bulls sometimes fight hard among themselves, and although 
their horns are not very formidable weapons, yet I knew of 
one case in which a bull was killed in such a duel, his chest 
being ripped open by his adversary's horns; and now and 
then a bull will kneel and grind its face and horns into the 
dust or mud. Often a whole herd will gather around and 
on an ant-hill, or even a small patch of level ground, and 
make it a regular stamping ground, treading it into dust 
with their sharp hoofs. They have another habit which 
I have not seen touched on in the books. Ordinarily their 
droppings are scattered anywhere on the plain; but again 
and again I found where hartebeests — and more rarely 
Grant's gazelles — had in large numbers deposited their 
droppings for some time in one spot. Hartebeest are 
homely creatures, with long faces, high withers, and show- 
ing when first in motion a rather ungainly gait, but they 
are among the swiftest and most enduring of antelope, and 
when at speed their action is easy and regular. When 
pursued by a dog they will often play before him — just as 
a tommy will — taking great leaps, with all four legs in- 
clined backward, evidently in a spirit of fun and derision. 
In the stomachs of those I killed, as in those of the zebras, 
I found only grass and a few ground plants; even in the 
open bush or thinly wooded country they seemed to graze 
and not browse. One fat and heavy bull weighed 340 



ON AX EAST AFRICAN RAN( H 



01 



pounds; a very old' bull, with horns much worn down 
299; and a cow in high condition 315. 

The Grant's gazelle is the most beautiful of all these 
plains creatures; it is about the size of a big white-tail deer; 
one heavy buck which I shot, although with poor horns, 
weighed 171 pounds. The finest among the old bucks have 
beautiful lyre-shaped horns, over two feet long, and their 




Vulture raven or white-necked raven 
From a photograph by J. A Men Loring 



proud, graceful carriage and lightness of movement render 
them a delight to the eye. As I have already said, the 
young and the females have the dark side stripe which 
marks all the tommies; but the old bucks lack this, and 
their color fades into the brown or sandy of the dry plains 
far more completely than is the case with zebra or kongoni. 
Like the other game of the plains they are sometimes found 
in small parties, or else in fair-sized herds, by themselves, 
and sometimes with other beasts; I have seen a single fine 
buck in a herd of several hundred zebra and kongoni. The 
Thomson's gazelles, hardly a third the weight of their 



6d AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

larger kinsfolk, are found scattered everywhere; they are 
not as highly gregarious as the zebra and kongoni, and are 
not found in such big herds; but their little bands — now a 
buck and several does, now a couple of does with their 
fawns, now three or four bucks together, now a score of 
individuals — are scattered everywhere on the flats. Like 
the Grants, their flesh is delicious, and they seem to have 
much the same habits. But they have one very marked 
characteristic: their tails keep up an incessant nervous 
twitching^ never being still for more than a few seconds at 
a time, while the larger gazelle in this part of its range 
rarely moves its tail at all. They are grazers and they 
feed, rest, and go to water at irregular times, or at least 
at difi^erent times in difi^erent. localities; and although they 
are most apt to rest during the heat of the day, I have 
seen them get up soon after noon, having lain down for a 
couple of hours, feed for an hour or so, and then lie down 
again. In the same way the habits of the game as to mi- 
gration vary with the different districts, in Africa as in 
America. There are places where all the game, perhaps 
notably the wildebeests, gather in herds of thousands, at 
certain times, and travel for scores of miles, so that a dis- 
trict which is teeming with game at one time may be almost 
barren of large wild life at another. But my information 
was that around the Kapiti Plains there was no such com- 
plete and extensive shift. If the rains are abundant and 
the grass rank, most of the game Vv'ill be found far out in 
the middle of the plains; if, as was the case at the time 
of my visit, there has been a long drought — the game will 
be found ten or fifteen miles away, near or among the foot- 
hills. 

Unless there was something special on, like a lion or 
rhinoceros hunt, I usually rode off followed only by my 
sais and gun-bearers. I cannot describe the beauty and 
the unceasing interest of these rides, through the teeming 
herds of game. It was like retracing the steps of time for 
sixty or seventy years, and being back in the days of Corn- 



ON AN EAST AFRICAN R.\NCH C,3 

wallis Harris and Gordon Cumming, in the palmy times 
of the giant fauna of South Africa. On Pease's own farm 
one day I passed through scores of herds of the beautiful 
and wonderful wild creatures I have spoken of above; all 
told there were several thousands of them. With the ex- 
ception of the wildebeest, most of them were not shy, and I 
could have taken scores of shots at a distance of a couple of 
hundred yards or thereabout. Of course, I did not shoot 
at anything unless we were out of meat or needed the skin 
for the collection; and when we took the skin we almost 
always took the meat too, for the porters, although they 
had their rations of rice, depended for much of their well- 
being on our success with the rifle. 

These rides through the wild, lonely country, with only 
my silent black followers, had a peculiar charm. When 
the sky was overcast it was cool and pleasant, for it is a high 
country; as soon as the sun appeared the vertical tropic 
rays made the air quiver above the scorched land. As we 
passed down a hill-side we brushed through aromatic shrubs 
and the hot pleasant fragrance enveloped us. When we came 
to a nearly dry watercourse, there would be beds of rushes, 
beautiful lilies and lush green plants with staring flowers; 
and great deep-green fig-trees, or flat-topped mimosas. In 
many of these trees there were sure to be native beehives; 
these were sections of hollow logs hung from the branches; 
they formed striking and characteristic features of the land- 
scape. Wherever there was any moisture there were flow- 
ers, brilliant of hue and many of them sweet of smell; and 
birds of numerous kinds abounded. When we left the hills 
and the wooded watercourses we might ride hour after 
hour across the barren desolation of the flats, while herds 
of zebra and hartebeest stared at us through the heat haze. 
Then the zebra, with shrill, barking neighs, would file off 
across the horizon, or the high-withered hartebeests, snort- 
ing and bucking, would rush off in a confused mass, as 
unreasoning panic succeeded foolish confidence. If I shot 
anything, vultures of several kinds, and the tall, hideous 



64 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

marabou storks, gathered before the skinners were through 
with their work; they usually stayed at a wary distance, 
but the handsome ravens, glossy-hued with white napes, 
big-billed, long-winged, and short-tailed, came round more 
familiarly. 

I rarely had to take the trouble to stalk anything; the 
shooting was necessarily at rather long range, but by ma- 
noeuvring a little, and never walking straight toward a beast, 
I was usually able to get whatever the naturalists wished. 
Sometimes I shot fairly wtII, and sometimes badly. On 
one day, for instance, the entry in my diary ran: "Missed 
steinbuck, pig, impalla and Grant; awful." On another 
day it ran in part as follows: "Out with Heller. Harte- 
beest, 250 yards, facing me; shot through face, broke neck. 
Zebra, very large, quartering, 160 yards, between neck 
and shoulder. Buck Grant, 220 yards, walking, behind 
shoulder. Steinbuck, 180 yards, standing, behind shoulder." 
Generally each head of game bagged cost me a goodly 
number of bullets; but only twice did I wound animals 
which I failed to get^ in the other cases the extra cartridges 
represented either misses at animals which got clean away 
untouched, or else a running fus-illade at wounded animals 
which I eventually got. I am a very strong believer in 
making sure, and, therefore, in shooting at a wounded ani- 
mal as long as there is the least chance of its getting off. 
The expenditure of a few cartridges is of no consequence 
whatever compared to the escape of a single head of game 
which should have been bagged. Shooting at long range 
necessitates much running. Some of my successful shots at 
Grant's gazelle and kongoni were made at 300, 350, and 
400 yards; but at such distances my proportion of misses 
was very large indeed — and there were altogether too many 
even at shorter ranges. 

The so-called grass antelopes, the steinbuck and duiker, 
were the ones at which I shot worst; they were quite plen- 
tiful, and they got up close, seeking to escape observation 
by hiding until the last moment; but they were small, and 



ON AN EAST AFRICAN RANCH 6.5 

when they did go they rushed half hidden through the grass 
and in and out among the bushes at such a speed, and with 
such jumps and twists and turns, that I found it wellnigh 
impossible to hit them with the rifle. The few I got were 
generally shot when they happened to stand still. 

On the steep, rocky, bush-clad hills there were little 
klipspringers and the mountain reedbuck or Chanler's reed- 
buck, a very pretty little creature. Usually we found the 
reedbuck does and their fawns in small parties, and the 
bucks by themselves; but we saw too few to enable us to 
tell whether this represented their normal habits. They 
fed on the grass, the hill plants, and the tips of certain of 
the shrubs, and were true mountaineers in their love of the 
rocks and rough ground, to which they fled in frantic haste 
when alarmed. They were shy and elusive little things, 
but not wary in the sense that some of the larger antelopes 
are wary. I shot two does with three bullets, all of which 
hit. Then I tried hard for a buck; at last, late one evening, 
I got up to one feeding on a steep hill-side, and actually 
took ten shots to kill him, hitting him no less than seven 
times. 

Occasionally we drove a ravine or a range of hills by 
means of beaters. On such occasions all kinds of things 
were put up. Most of the beaters, especially if they were 
wild savages impressed for the purpose from some neigh- 
boring tribe, carried throwing-sticks, with which they were 
very expert; as indeed were some of the colonials, like the 
Hills. Hares, looking and behaving much Hke small jack- 
rabbits, were plentiful both on the plains and in the ra- 
vines, and dozens of these were knocked over; while on 
several occasions I saw francolins and spurfowl cut down 
on the wing by a throwing-stick hurled from some un- 
usually dexterous hand. 

The beats, with the noise and laughter of the good- 
humored^ excitable savages, and the alert interest as to what 
would turn up next, were great fun; but the days I enjoyed 
most were those spent alone with my horse and gun-bearers. 



66 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

We might be off by dawn, and see the tropic sun flame 
splendid over the brink of the world; strange creatures 
rustled through the bush or fled dimly through the long 
grass, before the light grew bright; and the air was fresh 
and sweet as it blew in our faces. When the still heat of 
noon drew near I would stop under a tree, with my water 
canteen and my lunch. The men lay in the shade, and the 
hobbled pony grazed close by, while I either dozed or else 
watched through my telescope the herds of game lying 
down or standing drowsily in the distance. As the shadows 
lengthened I would again mount, and finally ride home- 
ward as the red sunset paled to amber and opal, and all 
the vast, mysterious African landscape grew to wonderful 
beauty in the dying twilight. 



CHAPTER III 



LION HUNTING ON THE KAPITI PLAINS 

The dangerous game of Africa are the lion, buffalo, 
elephant, rhinoceros, and leopard. The hunter who fol- 
lows any of these animals always does so at a certain risk 
to life or limb; a risk which it is his business to minimize 
by coolness, caution, good judgment, and straight shooting. 
The leopard is in point of pluck and ferocity more than the 
equal of the other four; but his small size always renders 
it likely that he will merely maul, and not kill, a man. 
My friend, Carl Akeley, of Chicago, actually killed bare- 
handed a leopard which sprang on him. He had already 
wounded the beast twice^ crippling it in one front and one 
hind paw; whereupon it charged, followed him as he tried 
to dodge the charge, and struck him full just as he turned. 
It bit him in one arm, biting again and again as it worked 
up the arm from the wrist to the elbow; but Akeley threw it, 
holding its throat with the other hand, and flinging its body 
to one side. It luckily fell on its side with its two wounded 
legs uppermost, so that it could not tear him. He fell for- 
ward with it and crushed in its chest with his knees until 
he distinctly felt one of its ribs crack; this, said Akeley, 
was the first moment when he felt he might conquer. Re- 
doubling his efforts, with knees and hand, he actually 
choked and crushed the life out of it, although his arm was 
badly bitten. A leopard will charge at least as readily as 
one of the big beasts, and is rather more apt to get his charge 
home, but the risk is less to life than to limb. 

There are other animals often or occasionally danger- 
ous to human life which are, nevertheless, not dangerous 
to the hunter. Crocodiles are far greater pests, and far 
more often man-eaters, than lions or leopards; but their 

G7 



68 AFRICAN GMIE TRAILS 

shooting is not accompanied by the smallest element of 
risk. Poisonous snakes are fruitful sources of accident, 
but they are actuated only by fear, and the anger born of 
fear. The hippopotamus sometimes destroys boats and 
kills those in them; but again there is no risk in hunting 
him. Finally, the hyena, too cowardly ever to be a source 
of danger to the hunter, is sometimes a dreadful curse to 
the weak and helpless. The hyena is a beast of unusual 
strength, and of enormous power in his jaws and teeth, 
and thrice over would he be dreaded were fang and sinew 
driven by a heart of the leopard's cruel courage. But 
though the creature's foul and evil ferocity has no such 
backing as that yielded by the angry daring of the spotted 
cat, it is yet fraught with a terror all its own; for on oc- 
casion the hyena takes to man-eating after its own fashion. 
Carrion-feeder though it is, in certain places it will enter 
native huts and carry away children or even sleeping adults; 
and where famine or disease has worked havoc among a 
people, the hideous spotted beasts become bolder and 
prey on the survivors. For some years past Uganda has 
been scourged by the sleeping sickness, which has ravaged 
it as in the Middle Ages the Black Death ravaged Europe. 
Hundreds of thousands of natives have died. Every effort 
has been made by the government officials to cope with 
the disease; and among other things sleeping-sickness 
camps have been established, where those stricken by the 
dread malady can be isolated and cease to be possible 
sources of infection to their fellows. Recovery among 
those stricken is so rare as to be almost unknown, but the 
disease is often slow, and months may elapse during which 
the diseased man is still able to live his life much as usual. 
In the big camps of doomed men and women thus estab- 
lished there were, therefore, many persons carrying on 
their avocations much as in an ordinary native village. 
But the hyenas speedily found that in many of the huts the 
inmates were a helpless prey. In 1908 and throughout 
the early part of 1909 they grew constantly bolder, haunt- 




Kermit Roosevelt, Sir Alfred Pease, and Mr. Roosevelt at the carcass of first big lion 



70 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

ing these sleeping-sickness camps, and each night enter- 
ing them, bursting into the huts and carrying off and eating 
the dying people. To guard against them each little group 
of huts was inclosed by a thick hedge; but after a while 
the hyenas learned to break through the hedges, and con- 
tinued their ravages; so that every night armed sentries had 
to patrol the camps, and every night they could be heard 
firing at the marauders. 

The men thus preyed on were sick to death, and for 
the most part helpless. But occasionally men in full vigor 
are attacked. One of Pease's native hunters was seized 
by a hyena as he slept beside the camp-fire, and part of 
his face torn off. Selous informed me that a friend of his, 
Major R. T. Coryndon, then administrator of Northwestern 
Rhodesia, was attacked by a hyena but two or three years 
ago. At the time Major Coryndon was lying, wrapped in 
a blanket, beside his wagon. A hyena, stealthily approach- 
ing through the night, seized him by the hand, and dragged 
him out of bed; but as he struggled and called out, the 
beast left him and ran off into the darkness. In spite of his 
torn hand the major was determined to get his assailant, 
which he felt sure would soon return. Accordingly, he 
went back to his bed, drew his cocked rifle beside him, 
pointing toward his feet, and feigned sleep. When all 
was still once more, a dim form loomed up through the 
uncertain light, toward the foot of the bed; it was the rav- 
enous beast returning for his prey; and the major shot and 
killed it where it stood. 

A few months ago a hyena entered the outskirts of 
Nairobi, crept into a hut, and seized and killed a native 
man. At Nairobi the wild creatures are always at the 
threshold of the town, and often cross it. At Governor 
Jackson's table, at Government House, I met Mr. and 
Mrs. Sandiford. Mr. Sandiford is managing the railroad. 
A few months previously, while he was sitting, with his 
family, in his own house in Nairobi, he happened to ask 
his daughter to look for something in one of the bedrooms. 



LION HUNTING ON THE KAPITI PLAINS 71 

She returned in a minute, quietly remarking, "Father, 
there's a leopard under the bed." So there was; and it 
was then remembered that the house-cat had been showing 
a marked and alert distrust of the room in question — very 
probably the leopard had gotten into the house while try- 
ing to catch her or one of the dogs. A neighbor with a rifle 
was summoned, and shot the leopard. 

Hyenas not infrequently kill mules and donkeys, tear- 
ing open their bellies, and eating them while they are still 
alive. Yet when themselves assailed they usually behave 
with abject cowardice. The Hills had a large Airedale 
terrier, an energetic dog of much courage. Not long before 
our visit this dog put up a hyena from a bushy ravine, in 
broad daylight, ran after it, overtook it, and flew at it. 
The hyena made no efl^ective fight, although the dog — not 
a third its weight — bit it severely, and delayed its flight so 
that it was killed. During the first few weeks of our trip 
I not infrequently heard hyenas after nightfall, but saw 
none. Kermit, however, put one out of a ravine or dry 
creek-bed — a donga, as it is locally called — and though the 
brute had a long start he galloped after it and succeeded 
in running it down. The chase was a long one, for twice the 
hyena got in such rocky country that he almost distanced 
his pursuer; but at last, after covering nearly ten miles, 
Kermit ran into it in the open, shooting it from the saddle 
as it shambled along at a canter growling with rage and 
terror. I would not have recognized the cry of the hyenas 
from what I had read, and it was long before I heard them 
laugh. Pease said that he had only once heard them really 
laugh. On that occasion he was watching for lions outside 
a Somali zareba. Suddenly a leopard leaped clear over 
the zareba, close beside him, and in a few seconds came 
flying back again, over the high thorn fence, with a sheep 
in its mouth; but no sooner had it landed than the hyenas 
rushed at it and took away the sheep; and then their cack- 
ling and shrieking sounded exactly like the most unpleasant 
kind of laughter. The normal death of very old lions, as 



72 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

they grow starved and feeble — unless they are previously 
killed in an encounter with dangerous game like buffalo — 
is to be killed and eaten by hyenas; but of course a lion 
in full vigor pays no heed to hyenas, unless it is to kill one 
if it gets in the way. 

During the last few decades, in Africa, hundreds of 
white hunters, and thousands of native hunters, have been 
killed or wounded by lions, buffaloes, elephants, and rhinos. 
All are dangerous game; each species has to its grewsome 
credit a long list of mighty hunters slain or disabled. Among 
those competent to express judgment there is the widest 
difference of opinion as to the comparative danger in hunt- 
ing the several kinds of animals. Probably no other hunter 
who has ever lived has combined Selous's experience with 
his skill as a hunter and his power of accurate observation 
and narration. He has killed between three and four 
hundred lions, elephants, buffaloes, and rhinos, and he 
ranks the lion as much the most dangerous, and the rhino 
as much the least, while he puts the buffalo and elephant 
in between, and practically on a par. Governor Jackson 
has killed between eighty and ninety of the four animals; 
and he puts the buffalo uncjuestionably first in point of for- 
midable capacity as a foe, the elephant equally unques- 
tionably second, the lion third, and the rhino last. Stigand 
puts them in the following order: lion, elephant, rhino, 
leopard, and buffalo. Drummond, who wrote a capital 
book on South African game, who was for years a pro- 
fessional hunter like Selous, and who had fine opportunities 
for observation, but who was a much less accurate observer 
than Selous, put the rhino as unquestionably the most dan- 
gerous, with the lion as second, and the buffalo and elephant 
nearly on a level. Samuel Baker, a mighty hunter and good 
observer, but with less experience of African game than any 
one of the above, put the elephant first, the rhino second, 
the buffalo seemingly third, and the lion last. The experts 
of greatest experience thus absolutely disagree among them- 
selves; and there is the same wide divergence of view 



LION HUNTING ON THE KAPITI PLAINS 73 

among good hunters and trained observers whose oppor- 
tunities have been less. Mr. Abel Chapman, for instance, 
regards both the elephant and the rhino as more danger- 




Clifford Hill's Kikuyu ostrich boys as they beat the tall grass tor lion on the 
third day of lion hunting at Killima (Hill) Ugami, when we got two large 
and one small one. The boys had their bows and arrows for protection 
From a photograph by Kermit Roosevelt 

ous than the lion; and many of the hunters I met in East 
Africa seemed inclined to rank the buffalo as more danger- 
ous than any other animal. A man who has shot but a 



74 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

dozen or a score of these various animals, all put together, 
is not entitled to express any but the most tentative opinion 
as to their relative prowess and ferocity; yet on the whole 
it seems to me that the weight of opinion among those best 
fitted to judge is that the lion is the most formidable op- 
ponent of the hunter, under ordinary conditions. This is 
my own view. But we must ever keep in mind the fact 
that the surrounding conditions, the geographical locality, 
and the wide individual variation of temper within the 
ranks of each species, must all be taken into account. 
Under certain circumstances a lion may be easily killed, 
whereas a rhino would be a dangerous foe. Under other 
conditions the rhino could be attacked with impunity, and 
the lion only with the utmost hazard; and one bull buffalo 
might flee and one bull elephant charge, and yet the next 
couple met with might show an exact reversal of behavior. 
At any rate, during the last three or four years, in Ger- 
man and British East Africa and Uganda, over fifty white 
men have been killed or mauled by lions buffaloes, elephants, 
and rhinos; and the lions have much the largest list of 
victims to their credit. In Nairobi church-yard I was shown 
the graves of seven men who had been killed by lions, and 
of one who had been killed by a rhino. The first man 
to meet us on the African shore was Mr. Campbell, Gov- 
ernor Jackson's A.D.C., and only a year previously he had 
been badly mauled by a lion. We met one gentleman who 
had been crippled for life by a lioness. He had marked 
her into some patches of brush, and coming up, tried to put 
her out of one thick clump. Failing, he thought she might 
have gone into another thicket, and walked toward it; 
instantly that his back was turned, the lioness, who had 
really been in the first clump of brush, raced out after him, 
threw him down, and bit him again and again before she 
was driven off. One night we camped at the very spot 
where, a score of years before, a strange tragedy had hap- 
pened. It was in the early days of the opening of the coun- 
try, and an expedition was going toward Uganda; one of 




•i '^ 



76 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

the officials in charge was sleeping In a tent with the flap 
open. There was an askari on duty; yet a Hon crept up, 
entered the tent, and seized and dragged forth the man. 
He struggled and made outcry; there was a rush of people, 
and the Hon dropped his prey and bounded off. The 
man's wounds were dressed, and he was put back to bed in 
his own tent; but an hour or two after the camp again grew 
still, the Hon returned, bent on the victim of whom he had 
been robbed; he re-entered the tent, seized the unfortu- 
nate wounded man with his great fangs, and this time 
made off with him into the surrounding darkness, killed 
and ate him. Not far from the scene of this tragedy, 
another had occurred. An English officer named Stewart, 
while endeavoring to kill his first Hon, was himself set on and 
slain. At yet another place we were shown where two 
settlers^ Messrs. Lucas and Goldfinch, had been one killed 
and one crippled by a Hon they had been hunting. They 
had been following the chase on horseback, and being men 
of bold nature, and having killed several lions, had become 
too daring. They hunted the Hon into a small piece of 
brush and rode too near it. It came out at a run and was 
on them before their horses could get under way. Gold- 
finch was knocked over and badly bitten and clawed; Lu- 
cas went to his assistance, and was in his turn knocked 
over, and the lion then lay on him and bit him to death. 
Goldfinch, In spite of his own severe wounds, crawled 
over and shot the great beast as It lay on his friend. 

Most of the settlers with whom I was hunting had met 
with various adventures In connection with lIon.s. Sir 
Alfred had shot many in different parts of Africa; some 
had charged fiercely, but he always stopped them. Cap- 
tain Slatter had killed a big male with a mane a few months 
previously. He was hunting it In company with Mr. Hum- 
phery, the district commissioner of whom I have already 
spoken, and it gave them some exciting moments, for when 
hit It charged savagely. Humphery had a shot-gun loaded 
with buckshot, Slatter his rifle. When wounded, the lion 



LION HUNTING ON THE KAPITI PLAINS 77 

charged straight home, hit Slatter, knocking him flat and 
rolhng him over and over in the sand, and then went after 
the native gun-bearer, who was running away — the worst 
possible course to follow with a charging lion. The mech- 
anism of Slatter's rifle was choked by the sand, and as he 
rose to his feet he saw the lion overtake the fleeing man, 
rise on his hind legs like a rearing horse — not springing— 
and strike down the fugitive. Humphery fired into him 
with buckshot, which merely went through the skin; and 
some minutes elapsed before Slatter was able to get his 
rifle in shape to kill the lion, which, fortunately, had be- 
gun to feel the effect of his wounds, and was too sick to re- 
sume hostilities of its own accord. The gun-bearer was 
badly but not fatally injured. Before this, Slatter, while 
on a lion hunt, had been set afoot by one of the animals he 
was after, which had killed his horse. It was at night and 
the horse was tethered within six yards of his sleeping 
master. The latter was aroused by the horse galloping off, 
and he heard it staggering on for some sixty yards before 
it fell. He and his friend followed it with lanterns and 
drove off the lion, but the horse was dead. The tracks and 
the marks on the horse showed what had happened. The 
lion had sprung clean on the horse's back, his fore claws 
dug into the horse's shoulders, his hind claws cutting into 
its haunches, while the great fangs bit at the neck. The 
horse struggled off at a heavy run, carrying its fearsome 
burden. After going some sixty yards the lion's teeth 
went through the .spinal cord, and the ride was over. 
Neither animal had made a sound, and the lion's feet did 
not touch the earth until the horse fell. 

While a magistrate in the Transvaal, Pease had under 
him as game officer a white hunter, a fine fellow, who under- 
went an extraordinary experience. He had been off some 
distance with his Kaffir boys, to hunt a lion. On his way 
home the hunter was hunted. It was after nightfall. He 
had reached a region where lions had not been seen for a 
long time, and where an attack by them was unknown. 



78 , AFRICAN GAJNIE TRAILS 

He was riding along a trail in the darkness, his big boar- 
hound trotting ahead, his native **boys" some distance 
behind. He heard a rustle in the bushes alongside the 
path, but paid no heed, thinking it was a reedbuck. Im- 
mediately afterward two lions came out in the path behind 
and raced after him. One sprang on him, tore him out 
of the saddle, and trotted off holding him in its mouth, while 
the other continued after the frightened horse. The lion 
had him b^ the right shoulder, and yet with his left hand 
he wrenched his knife out of his belt and twice stabbed it. 
The second stab went to the heart and the beast let go of 
him, stood a moment, and fell dead. Meanwhile, the dog 
had followed the other lion, which now, having abandoned 
the chase of the horse, and with the dog still at his heels, 
came trotting back to look for the man. Crippled though 
he was, the hunter managed to climb a small tree; and 
though the lion might have gotten him out of it, the dog 
interfered. Whenever the lion came toward the tree the 
dog worried him, and kept him off until, at the shouts and 
torches of the approaching Kaffir boys, he sullenly retired, 
and the hunter was rescued. 

Percival had a narrow escape from a lion, which nearly 
got him, though probably under a misunderstanding. He 
was riding through a wet spot of ground, where the grass 
was four feet high, when his horse suddenly burst into a 
run and the next moment a lion had galloped almost along- 
side of him. Probably the lion thought it was a zebra, for 
when Percival, leaning over, yelled in his face, the lion 
stopped short. But he at once came on again, and nearly 
caught the horse. However, they were now out of the tall 
grass, and the lion gradually drew up when they reached 
the open country. 

The two Hills, Clifford and Harold, were running an 
ostrich-farm. The lions sometimes killed their ostriches 
and stock; and the Hills in return had killed several lions. 
The Hills were fine fellows; Africanders, as their fore- 
fathers for three generations had been, and frontiersmen of 



LION HUNTING ON THE KAPITI PLAINS 



the best kind. Frorh the first moment they and I became 
fast friends, for we instinctively understood one another, 
and found that we fek ahke on all the big questions, and 
looked at life, and especially the life of effort led by the 
pioneer settler, from the 
same stand-point. They 
reminded me, at every 
moment, of those West- 
ern ranchmen and home- 
makers with whom I 
have always felt a special 
sense of companionship 
and with whose ideals 
and aspirations I have 
always felt a special 
sympathy. A couple of 
months before my visit, 
Harold Hill had met 
with a rather unpleasant 
adventure. He was walk- 
ing home across the lone- 
ly plains, in the broad 
daylight, never dream- 
ing that lions might be 
abroad, and was un- 
armed. When still some 
miles from his house, while plodding along, he glanced up 
and saw three lions in the trail only fifty yards off, staring 
fixedly at him. It happened to be a place where the grass 
was rather tall, and lions are always bold where there is the 
slightest cover; whereas, unless angered, they are cautious 
on bare ground. He halted, and then walked slowly to 
one side; and then slowly forward toward his house. The 
lions followed him with their eyes, and when he had passed 
they rose and slouched after him. They were not pleasant 
followers, but to hurry would have been fatal; and he walked 
slowly on along the road, while for a mile he kept catching 




One of the native beaters and gun-bearers 
From a photograph by Edmund Heller 



80 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

glimpses of the tawny bodies of the beasts as they trod 
stealthily forward through the sunburned grass, alongside 
or a little behind him. Then the grass grew short, and the 
lions halted and continued to gaze after him until he dis- 
appeared over a rise. 

Everywhere throughout the country we were crossing 
were signs that the lion was lord and that his reign was 
cruel. There were many lions, for the game on which they 
feed was extraordinarily abundant. They occasionally took 
the ostriches or stock of the settlers, or ravaged the herds 
and flocks of the natives, but not often; for their favor- 
ite food was yielded by the swarming herds of kongoni 
and zebras, on which they could prey at will. Later we 
found that in this region they rarely molested the buffalo, 
even where they lived in the same reedbeds; and this though 
elsewhere they habitually prey on the buffalo. But where 
zebras and hartebeests could be obtained without effort, 
it was evidently not worth their while to challenge such 
formidable quarry. Every ''kill" I saw was a kongoni or 
a zebra; probably I rame across fifty of each. One zebra 
kill, which was not more than eighteen hours old (after 
the lapse of that time the vultures and marabouts, not to 
speak of the hyenas and jackals, leave only the bare bones), 
showed just what had occurred. The bones were all in 
place, and the skin still on the lower legs and head. The 
animal was lying on its belly, the legs spread out, the neck 
vertebra crushed; evidently the lion had sprung clean on 
it, bearing it down by his weight while he bit through the 
back of the neck, and the zebra's legs had spread out as the 
body yielded under the lion. One fresh kongoni kill showed 
no marks on the haunches, but a broken neck and claw 
marks on the face and withers; in this case the lion's hind 
legs had remained on the ground, while with his fore paws 
he grasped the kongoni's head and shoulders, holding it 
until the teeth splintered the neck bone. 

One or two of our efforts to get lions failed, of course; 
the ravines we beat did not contain them, or we failed to. 



I 



LION HUNTING ON THE KAPITI PLAINS 



81 



make them leave some particularly difficult hill or swamp — 
for lions lie close. But Sir Alfred knew just the right place 
to go to, and was bound to get us lions — and he did. 

One day we started from the ranch house in good sea- 
son for an all-day lion hunt. Besides Kermit and myself, 
there was a fellow-guest, Medlicott, and not only our host, 




The start for the first day's lion hunting 
From a photograph by Kermit Roosevelt 

but our hostess and her daughter; and we were joined by 
Percival at lunch, which we took under a great fig-tree at 
the foot of a high, rocky hill. Percival had with him a little 
mongrel bull-dog, and a Masai "boy," a fine, bold-looking 
savage, with a handsome head-dress and the usual formidable 
spear; master, man, and dog evidently all looked upon any 
form of encounter with lions simply in the light of a spree. 
After lunch we began to beat down a long donga, or dry 
watercourse — a creek, as we should call it in the Western 



82 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

plains country. The watercourse, with low, steep banks, 
wound in curves, and here and there were patches of brush, 
which might contain anything in the shape of lion, chee- 
tah, hyena, or wild dog. Soon we came upon lion spoor 
in the sandy bed; first the footprints of a big male, then 
those of a lioness. We walked cautiously along each side of 
the donga, the horses following close behind so that if the 




View of rock where we lunched on the day we got the first four lions 
Frotn a photograph by Lady Pease 

lion were missed we could gallop after him and round him 
up on the plain. The dogs — for besides the little bull, we 
had a large brindled mongrel named Ben, whose courage 
belied his looks — began to show signs of scenting the lion; 
and we beat out each patch of brush, the natives shouting 
and throwing in stones, while we stood with the rifles where 
we could best command any probable exit. After a couple 
of false" alarms the dogs drew toward one patch, their hair 
bristling, and showing such eager excitement that it was 
evident something big was inside; and in a moment one of. 



LION HUNTING ON THE KAPITI PLAINS 



83 



the boys called, *'simba" (lion), and pointed with his fin- 
ger. It was just across the little ravine, there about four 
yards wide and as many feet deep; and I shifted my posi- 




Noon at Ugami. Sir Alfred Pease bending over behind Mr. Roosevelt 
From a photograph by Kerim't Roosevelt 

tion, peering eagerly into the bushes for some moments 
before I caught a glimpse of tawny hide; as it moved, there 
was a call to me to *' shoot," for at that distance, if the lion 



84 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

charged, there would be scant time to stop it; and I fired 
into what I saw. There was a commotion in the bushes, 
and Kermit fired; and immediately afterward there broke 
out on the other side, not the hoped-for big lion^ but two 
cubs the size of mastiffs. Each was badly wounded and wc 
finished them off; even if unwounded, they were too big 
to lake alive. 

This was a great disappointment, and as it was well 
on in the afternoon, and we had beaten the country most apt 
to harbor our game, it seemed unlikely that we would have 
another chance. Percival was on foot and a long way 
from his house, so he started for it; and the rest of us also 
began to jog homeward. But Sir Alfred, although he said 
nothing, intended to have another try. After going a mile 
or two he started off to the left at a brisk canter; and we, 
the other riders, followed, leaving behind our gun-bearers, 
saises, and porters. A couple of miles away was another 
donga, another shallow watercourse with occasional big 
brush patches along the winding bed; and toward this we 
cantered. Almost as soon as we reached it our leader found 
the spoor of two big lions; and with every sense acock, we 
dismounted and approached the first patch of tall bushes. 
We shouted and threw in stones, but nothing came out; 
and another small patch showed the same result. Then 
we mounted our horses again, and rode toward another 
patch a quarter of a mile off. I was mounted on Tran- 
quillity, the stout and quiet sorrel. 

This patch of tall, thick brush stood on the hither 
bank — that is, on our side of the watercourse. We rode 
up to it and shouted loudly. The response was immediate, 
in the shape of loud gruntings, and crashings through 
the thick brush. We were off our horses in an instant, 
I throwing the reins over the head of mine; and without 
delay the good old fellow began placidly grazing, quite un- 
moved by the ominous sounds immediately in front. 

I sprang to one side; and for a second or two we waited, 
uncertain whether we should see the lions charging out 



LION HUNTING ON THE KAPITI PLAINS 85 

ten yards distant or running away. Fortunately, they 
adopted the latter course. Right in front of me, thirty 
yards off, there appeared, from behind the bushes which 
had first screened him from my eyes, the tawny, galloping 
form of a big maneless lion. Crack! the Winchester spoke; 
and as the soft-nosed bullet ploughed forward through his 
flank the lion swerved so that I missed him with the second 
shot; but my third bullet went through the spine and for- 
ward into his chest. Down he came, sixty yards off, his 
hind quarters dragging, his head up, his ears back, his 
jaws open and lips drawn up in a prodigious snarl, as he 
endeavored to turn to face us. His back was broken; but 
of this we could not at the moment be sure, and if it had 
merely been grazed, he might have recovered, and then, 
even though dying, his charge might have done mischief. 
So Kermit, Sir Alfred, and I iired^ almost together, into his 
chest. His head sank, and he died. 

This lion had come out on the left of the bushes; the 
other, to the right of them, had not been hit, and we saw 
him galloping off across the plain, six or eight hundred 
yards away. A couple more shots missed, and we mounted 
our horses to try to ride him down. The plain sloped 
gently upward for three-quarters of a mile to a low crest or 
divide, and long before we got near him he disappeared 
over this. Sir Alfred and Kermit were tearing along in 
front and to the right, with Miss Pease close behind; while 
Tranquillity carried me, as fast as he could, on the left, 
with Medlicott near me. On topping the divide Sir Al- 
fred and Kermit missed the lion, which had swung to the 
left, and they raced ahead too far to the right. Medlicott 
and I, however, saw the lion, loping along close behind some 
kongoni; and this enabled me to get up to him as quickly as 
the lighter men on the faster horses. The going was now 
slightly downhill, and the sorrel took me along very well, 
while Medlicott, whose horse was slow, bore to the right 
and joined the other two men. We gained rapidly, and, 
finding out this, the hon suddenly halted and came to bay 



86 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

In a slight hollow, where the grass was rather long. The 
plain seemed flat, and we could see the Hon well from horse- 
back; but, especially when he lay down, it was most diffi- 
cult to make him out on foot, and impossible to do so when 
kneeling. 

We were about a hundred and fifty yards from the lion. 
Sir Alfred, Kermit, Medlicott, and Miss Pease ofl^ to one 
side, and slightly above him on the slope, while I was on 
the level, about equidistant from him and them. Kermit 
and I tried shooting from the horses; but at such a distance 
this was not effective. Then Kermit got off, but his horse 
would not let him shoot; and when I got off I could not 
make out the animal through the grass with sufficient 
distinctness to enable me to take aim. Old Ben the dog 
had arrived, and, barking loudly, was strolling about near 
the lion, which paid him not the slightest attention. At 
this moment my black sais, Simba, came running up to 
me and took hold of the bridle; he had seen the chase 
from the line of march and had cut across to join me. 
There was no other sais or gun-bearer anywhere near, 
and his action was plucky, for he was the only man 
afoot, with the lion at bay. Lady Pease had also ridden 
up and was an interested spectator only some fifty yards 
behind me. 

Now, an elderly man with a varied past which includes 
rheumatism does not vault lightly into the saddle; as his 
sons, for instance, can; and I had already made up my 
mind that in the event of the lion's charging it would be 
wise for me to trust to straight powder rather than to try to 
scramble into the saddle and get under way in time. The 
arrival of my two companions settled matters. I was not 
sure of the speed of Lady Pease's horse; and Simba was 
on foot and it was of course out of the question for me to 
leave him. So I said, "Good, Simba, now we'll see this 
thing through," and gentle-mannered Simba smiled a shy 
appreciation of my tone, though he could not understand 
the words. I was still unable to see the lion when I knelt, 



LION HUNTING ON THE KAPITI PLAINS 87 

but he was now standing up, looking first at one group of 
horses and then at the other, his tail lashing to and fro, his 
head held low, and his lips dropped over his mouth in 
peculiar fashion, while his harsh and savage growling 
rolled thunderously over the plain. Seeing Simba and me 




•' Ben " worrying the second big lion before it died, and when we were afraid it 

could yet charge 
From a photograph by Kertnit Roosevelt 

on foot, he turned toward us, his tail lashing quicker and 
quicker. Resting my elbow on Simba's bent shoulder, I 
took steady aim and pressed the trigger; the bullet went 
in between the neck and shoulder, and the lion fell over 
on his side, one foreleg in the air. He recovered in a mo- 
ment and stood up, evidently very sick, and once more 
faced me, growling hoarsely. I think he was on the eve 



88 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

of charging. I fired again at once, and this bullet broke 
h s back just behind the shoulders; and with the next I 
killed him outright, after we had gathered round him. 

These were two good-sized maneless lions; and very 
proud of them I was. I think Sir Alfred was at least as 
proud, especially because we had performed the feat alone, 
without any professional hunters being present. "We 
were all amateurs, only gentleman riders up," said Sir 
Alfred. It was late before we got the lions skinned. Then 
we set off toward the ranch, two porters carrying each lion 
skin, strapped to a pole; and two others carrying the cub 
skins. Night fell long before we were near the ranch; but 
the brilliant tropic moon lighted the trail. The stalwart 
savages who carried the bloody lion skins swung along at 
a faster walk as the sun went down and the moon rose 
higher; and they began to chant in unison, one uttering a 
single word or sentence, and the others joining in a deep- 
toned, musical chorus. The men on a safari, and indeed 
African natives generally, are always excited over the death 
of a lion, and the hunting tribes then chant their rough 
hunting songs, or victory songs, until the monotonous, 
rhythmical repetitions make them grow almost frenzied. 
The ride home through the moonlight, the vast barren land- 
scape shining like silver on either hand, was one to be re- 
membered; and above all, the sight of our trophies and of 
their wild bearers. 

Three days later we had another successful lion hunt. 
Our camp was pitched at a waterhole in a little stream 
called Potha, by a hill of the same name. Pease, Medlicott, 
and both the Hills were with us, and Heller came too; for 
he liked, when possible, to be with the hunters so that he 
could at once care for any beast that was shot. As the 
safari was stationary, we took fifty or sixty porters as beat- 
ers. It was thirteen hours before we got into camp that 
evening. The Hills had with them as beaters and water- 
carriers half a dozen of the Wakamba who were working 
on their farm. It was interesting to watch these naked 



LION HUNTING ON THE KAPITI PLAINS 



89 



savages, with their filed teeth, their heads shaved in curious 

patterns, and carrying for arms httle bows and arrows. 

Before lunch we beat a long, low hill. Harold Hill was 




Kermit Roosevelt and cheetah shot by him 
From a photograph by Edviund HeUet 



with me; Medlicott and Kermit were together. We placed 
ourselves, one couple on each side of a narrow neck, two- 
thirds of the way along the crest of the hill; and soon 



90 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

after we were in position we heard the distant shouts of 
the beaters as they came toward us, covering the crest and 
the tops of the slopes on both sides. It was rather dis- 
concerting to find how much better Hill's eyes were than 
mine. He saw everything first, and it usually took some 
time before he could make me see it. In this first drive 
nothing came my way except some mountain reedbuck 
does, at which I did not shoot. But a fine male cheetah 
came to Kermit, and he bowled it over in good style as 
it ran. 

Then the beaters halted, and waited before resuming 
their march until the guns had gone clear round and es- 
tablished themselves at the base of the farther end of the 
hill. This time Kermit, who was a couple of hundred 
yards from me, killed a reedbuck and a steinbuck. Sud- 
denly Hill said, *'Lion," and endeavored to point it out to 
me, as it crept cautiously among the rocks on the steep 
hill-side, a hundred and fifty yards away. At first I could 
not see it; finally I thought I did and fired, but, as it proved, 
at a place just above him. However, it made him start 
up, and I immediately put the next bullet behind his shoul- 
ders; it was a fatal shot; but, growling, he struggled 
down the hill, and I fired again and killed him. It was 
not much of a trophy, however, turning out to be a half- 
grown male. 

We lunched under a tree, and then arranged for an- 
other beat. There was a long, wide valley, or rather a slight 
depression in the ground — for it was only three or four feet 
below the general level — in which the grass grew tall, as 
the soil was quite wet. It was the scene of Percival's 
adventure with the lion that chased him. Hill and I sta- 
tioned ourselves on one side of this valley or depression, 
toward the upper end; Pease took Kermit to the opposite 
side; and we waited, our horses some distance behind us. 
The beaters were put in at the lower end, formed a line 
across the valley, and beat slowly toward us, making a 
great noise. 



LION HUNTING ON THE KAPITI PLAINS 91 

They were still some distance away when Hill saw 
three lions, which had slunk stealthily off ahead of them 
through the grass. I have called the grass tall, but this was 
only by comparison with the short grass of the dry plains. 
In the depression or valley it was some three feet high. In 
such grass a lion, which is marvellously adept at hiding, 




The third male liun shot by Mr. Roosevelt 
From a photograph by Edmund Heller 

can easily conceal itself, not merely when lying down, but 
when advancing at a crouching gait. If it stands erect, 
however, it can be seen. 

There were two lions near us, one directly in our front, 
a hundred and ten yards off. Some seconds passed before 
Hill could make me realize that the dim yellow smear in 
the yellow-brown grass was a lion; and then I found such 
difficulty in getting a bead on him that I overshot. How- 
ever, the bullet must have passed very close — indeed, 
I think it just grazed him — for he jumped up and faced us, 



92 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

growling savagely. Then, his head lowered, he threw his 
tail straight into the air and began to charge. The first 
few steps he took at a trot, and before he could start into a 
gallop I put the soft-nosed Winchester bullet in between the 
neck and shoulder. Down he went with a roar; the wound 
was fatal, but I was taking no chances, and I put two more 
bullets in him. Then we walked toward where Hill had 
already seen another lion — the lioness, as it proved. Again 
he had some difficulty in making me see her; but he suc- 
ceeded and I walked toward her through the long grass, 
repressing the zeal of my two gun-bearers, who were stanch, 
but who showed a tendency to walk a little ahead of me 
on each side, instead of a little behind. I walked toward 
her because I could not kneel to shoot in grass so tall; and 
when shooting off-hand I like to be fairly close, so as to be 
sure that my bullets go in the right place. At sixty yards I 
could make her out clearly, snarling at me as she faced me; 
and I shot her full in the chest. She at once performed a 
series of extraordinary antics, tumbling about on her head, 
just as if she were throwing somersaults, first to one side 
and then to the other. I fired again, but managed to shoot 
between the somersaults, so to speak, and missed her. 
The shot seemed to bring her to herself, and away she tore; 
but instead of charging us she charged the line of beaters. 
She was dying fast, however, and in her weakness failed 
to catch any one; and she sank down into the long grass. 
Hill and I advanced to look her up, our rifles at full cock, 
and the gun-bearers close behind. It is ticklish work to 
follow a wounded lion in tall grass, and we walked carefully, 
every sense on the alert. We passed Heller, who had been 
with the beaters. He spoke to us with an amused smile. 
His only weapon was a pair of field-glasses, but he always 
took things as the)^ came, with entire coolness, and to be 
close to a wounded lioness when she charged merely inter- 
ested him. A beater came running up and pointed toward 
where he had seen her, and we walked toward the place. 
At thirty yards distance Hill pointed, and, eagerly peering. 



LION HUNTING ON THE KAPITI PLAINS 93 

I made out the form of the honess showing indistinctly 
through the grass. She was half crouching, half sitting, her 
head bent down; but she still had strength to do mischief. 
She saw us, but before she could turn I sent a bullet through 
her shoulders; down she went, and was dead when we 
walked up. A cub had been seen, and another full-grown 
lion, but they had slunk off and we got neither. 

This was a full-grown, but young, lioness of average 
size; her cubs must have been several months old. We 
took her entire to camp to weigh; she weighed two hundred 
and eighty-three pounds. The first lion, which we had 
difficulty in finding, as there were no identifying marks in 
the plain of tall grass, was a good-sized male, weighing 
about four hundred pounds, but not yet full-grown; al- 
though he was probably the father of the cubs. 

We were a long way from camp, and, after beating in 
vain for the other lion, we started back; it was after night- 
fall before we saw the camp-fires. It was two hours later 
before the porters appeared, bearing on poles the skin of the 
dead lion, and the lioness entire. The moon was nearly full, 
and it was interesting to see them come swinging down the 
trail in the bright silver light, chanting in deep tones, over 
and over again, a line or phrase that sounded like: 

"Zou-zou-boule ma ja guntai; zou-zou-boule ma ja guntai.' 

Occasionally they would interrupt it by the repetition in 
unison, at short intervals, of a guttural ejaculation sound- 
ing like "huzlem." They marched into cam.p, then up 
and down the lines, before the rows of small fires; then, 
accompanied by all the rest of .the porters, they paraded up 
to the big fire where I was standing. Here they stopped 
and ended the ceremony by a minute or two's vigorous dan- 
cing amid singing and wild shouting. The firelight gleamed 
and nickered across the grim dead beasts, and the shining 
eyes and black features of the excited savages, while all 
around the moon flooded the landscape with her white light. 



CHAPTER IV 
ON SAFARI. RHINO AND GIRAFFE 

When we killed the last lions we were already on safari, 
and the camp was pitched by a waterhole on the Potha, 
a half-dried stream, little more than a string of pools and 
reedbeds, winding down through the sun-scorched plain. 
Next morning we started for another waterhole at the rocky 
hill of Bondoni, about eight miles distant. 

Safari life is very pleasant, and also very picturesque. 
The porters are strong, patient, good-humored savages, 
with something childlike about them that makes one really 
fond of them. Of course, like all savages and most children, 
they have their limitations, and in dealing with them firm- 
ness is even more necessary than kindness; but the man 
is a poor creature who does not treat them with kindness 
also, and I am rather sorry for him if he does not grow to 
feel for them, and to make them in return feel for him, a real 
and friendly liking. They are subject to gusts of passion, 
and they are now and then guilty of grave misdeeds and 
shortcomings; sometimes for no conceivable reason, at least 
from the white man's stand-point. But they are generally 
cheerful, and when cheerful are always amusing; and they 
work hard, if the white man is able to combine tact and 
consideration with that insistence on the performance of 
duty the lack of which they despise as weakness. Any 
little change or excitement is a source of pleasure to them. 
When the march is over they sing; and after two or three 
days in camp they will not only sing, but dance when an- 
other march is to begin. Of course at times they suffer 
greatly from thirst and hunger and fatigue, and at times 
they will suddenly grow sullen or rebel without what seems 
to us any adequate cause; and they have an inconsequent 

94 



ON SAFARI. RHINO AND GIRAFFE 



95 



type of mind which now and then leads them to commit 
folHes all the more exasperating because they are against 
their own interest no less than against the interest of their 
employer. But they do well on the whole, and safari life 
is attractive to them. They are fed well; the government 
requires that they be fitted with suitable clothes and given 
small tents, so that they are better clad and sheltered than 
they would be otherwise; and their wages represent money 
which they could get in no other way. The safari repre- 




1 he carnival, oil buluri at I'ulllu 

In single file came the long line of burden-bearers 

From a photograph by Keriuit Roosevelt 



sents a great advantage to the porter; who in his turn alone 
makes the safari possible. 

When we were to march, camp was broken as early in 
the day as possible. Each man had his allotted task, and 
the tents, bedding, provisions, and all else were expeditiously 
made into suitable packages. Each porter is supposed 
to carry from fifty-five to sixty pounds, which may all be 
in one bundle or in two or three. The American flag, which 
fiew over my tent, was a matter of much pride to the por- 
ters, and was always carried at the head or near the head 
of the line of march; and after it in single file came the 
long line of burden-bearers. As they started, some of them 
would blow on horns or whistles and others beat little 
tomtoms; and at intervals this would be renewed again and 
again throughout the march; or the men might suddenly 
begin to chant, or merely to keep repeating in unison some 



96 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

one word or one phrase whlch^ when we asked to have it 
translated, might or might not prove to be entirely mean- 
ingless. The headmen carried no burdens, and the tent 
boys hardly anything, while the saises walked with the 
spare horses. In addition to the canonical and required 
costume of blouse or jersey and drawers, each porter wore 
a blanket, and usually something else to which his soul 
inclined. It might be an exceedingly shabby coat; it might 
be, of all things in the world, an umbrella, an article for 




The American flag was always at the head or near the head of the line of march 

'I'he caravan on safari at Potha 

From a photograph by Kervtit Roosevelt 

which they had a special attachment. Often I Vvould see 
a porter, who thought nothing whatever of walking for 
hours at mid-day under the equatorial sun with his head 
bare, trudging along with solemn pride either under an 
open umbrella, or carrying the umbrella (tied much like 
Mrs. Gamp's) in one hand, as a wand of dignity. Then 
their head-gear varied according to the fancy of the indi- 
vidual. Normally it was a red fez, a kind of cap only used 
in hot climates, and exquisitely designed to be useless 
therein because it gives absolutely no protection from the 
sun. But one would wear a skin cap; another would sud- 
denly put one or more long feathers in his fez; and another, 
discarding the fez, would revert to some purely savage 
head-dress which he would wear with equal gravity whether 
it were, in our eyes, really decorative or merely comic. One 
such head-dress, for instance, consisted of the skin of the 



98 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

top of a zebra's head, with the two ears. Another was 
made of the skins of squirrels, with the tails both sticking 
up and hanging down. Another consisted of a bunch of 
feathers woven into the hair, which itself was pulled out 
into strings that were stiffened with clay. Another was 
really too intricate for description because it included the 
man's natural hair, some strips of skin, and an empty 
tin can. 

If it were a long journey and we broke it by a noonday 
halt, or if it were a short journey and we reached camp 
ahead of the safari, it was interesting to see the long file 
of men approach. Here and there, leading the porters, 
scattered through the line, or walking alongside, were the 
askaris, the rifle-bearing soldiers. They were not marks- 
men, to put it mildly, and I should not have regarded them 
as particularly efficient allies in a serious fight; but they 
were excellent for police duty in camp, and were also of use 
in preventing collisions with the natives. After the leading 
askaris might come one of the headmen; one of whom, 
by the way, looked exactly like a Semitic negro, and always 
travelled with a large dirty-white umbrella in one hand; 
while another, a tall, powerful fellow, was a mission boy 
who spoke good English; I mention his being a mission 
boy because it is so frequently asserted that mission boys 
never turn out well. Then would come the man with the 
flag, followed by another blowing on an antelope horn, or 
perhaps beating an empty can as a drum; and then the 
long line of men, some carrying their loads on their heads, 
others on their shoulders, others, in a very few cases, on 
their backs. As they approached the halting place their 
spirits rose, the whistles and horns were blown, and the 
improvised drums beaten, and perhaps the whole line would 
burst into a chant. 

On reaching the camping ground each man at once set 
about his allotted task, and the tents were quickly pitched 
and the camp put in order, while water and firewood were 
fetched. The tents were pitched in long lines, in the first 



II 



ON SAFARI. RHINO AND GIRAFFE 99 

of which stood my tent, flanked by those of the other white 
men and by the dining tent. In the next Hne were the cook 
tent, the provision tent, the store tent, the skinning tent, 
and the Hke; and then came the Unes of small white tents 
for the porters. Between each row of tents was a broad 
street. In front of our own tents in the first line an askari 
was always pacing to and fro; and when night fell we 
would kindle a camp-fire and sit around it under the stars. 
Before each of the porters' tents was a little fire, and be- 
side it stood the pots and pans in which the porters did their 
cooking. Here and there were larger fires, around which 
the gun-bearers or a group of askaris or of saises might 
gather. After nightfall the multitude of fires lit up the 
darkness and showed the tents in shadowy outline; and 
around them squatted the porters, their faces flickering 
from dusk to ruddy light, as they chatted together or sud- 
denly started some snatch of wild African melody in which 
all their neighbors might join. After a while the talk and 
laughter and singing would gradually die away, and as we 
white men sat around our fire, the silence would be un- 
broken except by the queer cry of a hyena, or much more 
rarely by a sound that always demanded attention — the 
yawning grunt of a questing lion. 

If we wished to make an early start we would breakfast 
by dawn and then we often returned to camp for lunch. 
Otherwise we would usually be absent all day, carrying 
our lunch with us. We might get in before sunset or we 
might be out till long after nightfall; and then the gleam 
of the lit fires was a welcome sight as we stumbled toward 
them through the darkness. Once in, each went to his 
tent to take a hot bath; and then, clean and refreshed, we 
sat down to a comfortable dinner, with game of some sort 
as the principal dish. 

On the first march after leaving our lion camp at Potha 
I shot a wart-hog. It was a good-sized sow, which, in com- 
pany with several of her half-grown offspring, was grazing 
near our line of march; there were some thorn-trees which 



100 



AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 



gave a little cover, and I killed her at a hundred and eighty 
yards, using the Springfield, the lightest and handiest of all 
my rifles. Her flesh was good to eat, and the skin, as with 
all our specimens, was saved for the National Museum. 
I did not again have to shoot a sow, although I killed half- 
grown pigs for the table, and boars for specimens. This 
sow and her porkers were not rooting, but were grazing 




Making camp at Bondoni 
From a photograph by Ker)iiit Roosevelt 

as if they had been antelope; her stomach contained noth- 
ing but chopped green grass. Wart-hogs are common 
throughout the country over which we hunted. They are 
hideous beasts, with strange protuberances on their cheeks; 
and when alarmed they trot or gallop away, holding the 
tail perfectly erect with the tassel bent forward. Usually 
they are seen in family parties, but a big boar will often be 
alone. They often root up the ground, but the stomachs of 
those we shot were commonly filled with nothing but grass. 



ON SAFARI. RHINO AND GIRAFFE loi 

If the weather is cloudy or wet they may be out all day 
long, but in hot, dry weather we generally found them 
abroad only in the morning and evening. A pig is always 
a comical animal; even more so than is the case with a 
bear, which also impresses one with a sense of grotesque 
humor — and this notwithstanding the fact that both boar 
and bear may be very formidable creatures. A wart-hog 
standing alertly at gaze, head and tail up, legs straddled 
out, and ears cocked forward, is rather a figure of fun; 
and not the less so when with characteristic suddenness he 
bounces round with a grunt and scuttles madly off to safety. 
Wart-hogs are beasts of the bare plain or open forest, and 
though they will often lie up in patches of brush they do 
not care for thick timber. 

After shooting the wart-hog we marched on to our 
camp at Bondoni. The gun-bearers were Mohammedans, 
and the dead pig was of no service to them; and at their 
request I walked out while camp was being pitched and 
shot them a buck; this I had to do now and then, but I 
always shot males, so as not to damage the species. 

Next day we marched to the foot of Kilimakiu Moun- 
tain, near Captain Slatter's ostrich-farm. Our route lay 
across bare plains thickly covered with withered short grass. 
All around us as we marched were the game herds, zebras 
and hartebeests, gazelles of the two kinds, and now and 
then wildebeests. Hither and thither over the plain, cross- 
ing and recrossing, ran the dusty game trails, each with 
its myriad hoof-marks; the round hoof-prints of the zebra, 
the heart-shaped marks that showed where the hartebeest 
herd had trod, and the delicate etching that betrayed where 
the smaller antelope had passed. Occasionally we crossed 
the trails of the natives, worn deep in the hard soil by the 
countless thousands of bare or sandalled feet that had 
trodden them. Africa is a country of trails. Across the 
high veldt, in every direction, run the tangled trails of the 
multitudes of game that have lived thereon from time im- 
memorial. The great beasts of the marsh and the forest 



102 



APRICAN GAME TRAILS 



made therein broad and muddy trails which often offer 
the only pathway by which a man can enter the sombre 
depths. In wet ground and dry ahke are also found the 
trails of savage man. They lead from village to village, 
and in places they stretch for hundreds of miles, where 
trading parties have worn them in the search for ivory, or 

in the old days when 
raiding or purchas- 
ing slaves. The trails 
made by the men are 
made much as the 
beasts make theirs. 
They are generally 
longer and better de- 
fined, although I have 
seen hippo tracks 
more deeply marked 
than any made by 
savage man. But they 
are made simply by 
men following in one 
another's footsteps, 
and they are never 
quite straight. They 
bend now a little to 
one side, now a little 
to the other, and sud- 
den loops mark the 
spot where some van- 
ished obstacle once 
stood; around it the first trail-makers went, and their suc- 
cessors have ever trodden in their footsteps, even though 
the need for so doing has long passed away. 

Our camp at Kilimakiu was by a grove of shady trees, 
and from it at sunset we looked across the vast plain and 
saw the far-off mountains grow umber and purple as the 
light waned. Back of the camp, and of the farm-house 




A tribe of the Wakamba with their chief (in khaki with 
a golf cap) that came to present Mr. Roosevelt with 
a sheep near Kilimakiu 

From a photograph by Ktrmit Roosevelt 



ON SAFARI. RHINO AND GIRAFFE 103 

near which we were, rose KIHmaklu Mountain, beautifully 
studded with groves of trees of many kinds. On its farther 
side lived a tribe of the Wakamba. Their chief with all the 
leading men of his village came in state to call upon me, 
and presented me with a fat hairy sheep, of the ordinary 
kind found in this part of Africa, where the sheep very 
wisely do not grow wool. The headman was dressed in 
khaki, and showed me with pride an official document 
which confirmed him in his position by direction of the 
government, and required him to perform various acts, 
chiefly in the way of preventing his tribes-people from 
committing robbery or murder, and of helping to stamp 
out cattle disease. Like all the Wakamba they had flocks 
of goats and sheep, and herds of humped cattle; but they 
were much in need of meat and hailed my advent. They 
were wild savages with filed teeth, many of them stark 
naked, though some of them carried a blanket. Their 
heads were curiously shaved so that the hair tufts stood out 
in odd patterns, and they carried small bows, and arrows 
with poisoned heads. 

The following morning I rode out with Captain Slatter. 
I We kept among the hills. The long drought was still un- 
broken. The little pools were dry and their bottoms baked 
like iron, and there was not a drop in the watercourses. 
Part of the land was open and part covered with a thin 
forest or bush of scattered mimosa-trees. In the open 
country were many zebras and hartebeests, and the latter 
were found even in the thin bush. In the morning we found 
a small herd of eland at which, after some stalking, I got a 
long shot and missed. The eland is the largest of all the 
horned creatures that are called antelope, being quite as 
heavy as a fattened ox. The herd I approached consisted 
of a dozen individuals, two of them huge bulls, their coats 
having turned a slaty blue, their great dewlaps hanging 
down, and the legs looking almost too small for the massive 
bodies. The reddish-colored cows were of far lighter build. 
Eland are beautiful creatures and ought to be domesticated. 



104 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

As I crept toward them I was struck by their Hkeness to 
great, clean, handsome cattle. They were grazing or rest- 
ing, switching their long tails at the flies that hung in 
attendance upon them and lit on their flanks, just as if they 
were Jerseys in a field at home. My bullet fell short, their 
size causing me to underestimate the distance, and away 
they went at a run, one or two of the cows in the first hurry 
and confusion skipping clean over the backs of others that 
got in their way — a most unexpected example of agility in 
such large and ponderous animals. After a few hundred 
yards they settled down to the slashing trot which is their 
natural gait, and disappeared over the brow of a hill. 

The morning was a blank, but early in the afternoon 
we saw the eland herd again. They were around a tree in 
an open space, and we could not get near them. But in- 
stead of going straight away they struck off to the right and 
described almost a semicircle, and though they were over 
four hundred yards distant, they were such big creatures and 
their gait was so steady that I felt warranted in shooting. 
On the dry plain I could mark where my bullets fell, and 
though I could not get a good chance at the bull I finally 
downed a fine cow; and by pacing I found it to be a little 
over a quarter of a mile from where I stood when shooting. 

It was about nine miles from camp, and I dared not 
leave the eland alone, so I stationed one of the gun-bearers 
by the great carcass and sent a messenger in to Heller, on 
whom we depended for preserving the skins of the big 
game. Hardly had this been done when a Wakamba man 
came running up to tell us that there was a rhinoceros on 
the hill-side three-quarters of a mile away, and that he had 
left a companion to watch it while he carried us the news. 
Slatter and I immediately rode in the direction given, fol- 
lowing our wild-looking guide; the other gun-bearer trotting 
after us. In five minutes we had reached the opposite hill- 
crest, where the watcher stood, and he at once pointed out 
the rhino. The huge beast was standing in entirely open 
country, although there were a few scattered trees of no 



ON SAFARI. RHINO AND GIRAFFE 



10.5 



great size at some little distance from him. We left our 
horses in a dip of the ground and began the approach; 
I cannot say that we stalked him, for the approach was too 
easy. The wind blew from him to us, and a rhino's eyesight 
is dull. Thirty yards from where he stood was a bush four 
or five feet high, and though it was so thin that we could 



HB|^^^'~ ^ _j^^ ^1 


t ^^^^^^H||||||MMdHH| 


-&lt;*• . - . ^#%r 


mffUr*' .,[ ,-^S 


HiHlHi^HBMto&lt;?:3^Hkin&lt;' 


J 



&gt;kiiiii:ny lliL' eland 
From a plwtogra/iJi by Ediinttid Heller 



distinctly see him through the leaves, it shielded us from 
the vision of his small, piglike eyes as we advanced toward 
it, stooping and in single file, I leading. The big beast 
stood like an uncouth statue, his hide black in the sun- 
light; he seemed what he was, a monster surviving over 
from the world's past, from the days when the beasts of 
the prime ran riot in their strength, before man grew so 
cunning of brain and hand as to master them. So little 
did he dream of our presence that when we were a hundred 
yards off he actually lay down. 



106 AFRICAN GAJVIE TRAILS 

Walking lightly, and with every sense keyed up, we 
at last reached the bush, and I pushed forward the safety 
of the double-barrelled Holland rifle which I was now to 
use for the first time on big game. As I stepped to one side 
of the bush so as to get a clear aim, with Slatter following, 
the rhino saw me and jumped to his feet with the agility of 
a polo pony. As he rose I put in the right barrel, the bullet 
going through both lungs. At the same moment he wheeled, 
the blood spouting from his nostrils, and galloped full on 
us. Before he could get quite all the way round in his head- 
long rush to reach us, I struck him with my left-hand 
barrel, the bullet entering between the neck and shoulder 
and piercing his heart. At the same instant Captain Slatter 
fired, his bullet entering the neck vertebrae. Ploughing up 
the ground with horn and feet, the great bull rhino, still 
head toward us, dropped just thirteen paces from where 
we stood. 

This was a wicked charge, for the rhino meant mischief 
and came on with the utmost determination. It is not safe 
to generalize from a- few instances. Judging from what I 
have since seen^ I am inclined to believe that both lion and 
buffalo are more dangerous game than rhino; yet the first 
two rhinos I met both charged, whereas we killed our first 
four lions and first four buffaloes without any of them 
charging, though two of each were stopped as they were 
on the point of charging. Moreover, our experience with 
this bull rhino illustrates what I have already said as to one 
animal being more dangerous under certain conditions, and 
another more dangerous under different conditions. If it 
had been a lion instead of a rhino, my first bullet would, 
I believe, have knocked all the charge out of it; but the 
vitality of the huge pachyderm was so great, its mere bulk 
counted for so much, that even such a hard-hitting rifle as 
my double Holland — than which I do not believe there 
exists a better weapon for heavy game — could not stop 
it outright, although either of the wounds inflicted would 
have been fatal in a few seconds. 





i c- 



■^ 



i ^ 



2 f 



~i 'S&gt; 










ON SAFARI. RHINO AND GIRAFFE 109 

Leaving a couple of men with the dead rhino, to protect 
it from the Wakamba by day and the hons by night, we rode 
straight to camp, which we reached at sunset. It was 
necessary to get to work on the two dead beasts as soon 
as possible in order to be sure of preserving their skins. 
Heller was the man to be counted on for this task. He it 
was who handled all the skins, who, in other words, was 
making the expedition of permanent value so far as big 
game was concerned; and no work at any hour of the day 
or night ever came amiss to him. He had already trained 
eight Wakamba porters to act as skinners under his super- 
vision. On hearing of our success, he at once said that we 
ought to march out to the game that night so as to get to 
work by daylight. Moreover, we were not comfortable at 
leaving only two men with each carcass, for lions were both 
bold and plentiful. 

The moon rose at eight and we started as soon as she 
was above the horizon. We did not take the horses, be- 
cause there was no water where we were going, and fur- 
thermore we did not like to expose them to a possible attack 
by lions. The march out by moonlight was good fun, for 
though I had been out all day, I had been riding, not walk- 
ing, and so was not tired. A hundred porters went with us 
so as to enable us to do the work quickly and bring back 
to camp the skins and all the meat needed, and these por- 
ters carried water, food for breakfast, and what little was 
necessary for a one-night camp. We tramped along in sin- 
gle file under the moonlight, up and down the hills, and 
through the scattered thorn forest. Kermit and Medlicott 
went first, and struck such a pace that after an hour we had 
to halt them so as to let the tail end of the file of porters 
catch up. Then Captain Slatter and I set a more deco- 
rous pace, keeping the porters closed up in line behind us. 
In another hour we began to go down a long slope toward 
a pin-point of light in the distance which we knew was the 
fire by the rhinoceros. The porters, like the big children they 
were, felt in high feather, and began to chant to an accom- 



110 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

panlment of whistling and horn-blowing as we tramped 
through the dry grass which was flooded with silver by the 
moon, now high in the heavens. 

As soon as we reached the rhino, Heller with his 
Wakamba skinners pushed forward the three-quarters of a 
mile to the eland, returning after midnight with the skin 
and all the best parts of the meat. 

Around the dead rhino the scene was lit up both by the 
moon and by the flicker of the fires. The porters made 
their camp under a small tree a dozen rods to one side of 
the carcass, building a low circular fence of branches on 
which they hung their bright-colored blankets, two or 
three big fires blazing to keep off possible lions. Half as 
far on the other side of the rhino a party of naked savages 
had established their camp, if camp it could be called, 
for really all they did was to squat down round a couple 
of fires with a few small bushes disposed round about. 
The rhino had been opened, and they had already taken 
out of the carcass what they regarded as titbits and what 
we certainly did not 'grudge them. Between the two camps 
lay the huge dead beast, his hide glistening in the moon- 
light. In each camp the men squatted around the fires 
chatting and laughing as they roasted strips of meat on 
long sticks, the fitful blaze playing over them, now leaving 
them in darkness, now bringing them out into a red relief. 
Our own tent was pitched under another tree a hundred 
yards off, and when I went to sleep, I could still hear the 
drumming and chanting of our feasting porters; the sav- 
ages were less at ease, and their revel was quiet. 

Early next morning I went back to camp, and soon after 
reaching there again started out for a hunt. In the after- 
noon I came on giraffes and got up near enough to shoot at 
them. But they are such enormous beasts that I thought 
them far nearer than they were. My bullet fell short, and 
they disappeared among the mimosas, at their strange 
leisurely looking gallop. Of all the beasts in an African 
landscape none is more striking than the giraffe. Usually 



■»\%&amp;i 




112 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

it is found in small parties or in herds of fifteen or twenty 
or more individuals. Although it will drink regularly if 
occasion offers, it is able to get along without water for 
months at a time, and frequents by choice the dry plains or 
else the stretches of open forest where the trees are scattered 
and ordinarily somewhat stunted. Like the rhinoceros — 
the ordinary or prehensile-lipped rhinoceros — the giraffe is 
a browsing and not a grazing animal. The leaves, buds, 
and twigs of the mimosas or thorn-trees form its customary 
food. Its extraordinary height enables it to bring into play 
to the best possible advantage its noteworthy powers of 
vision, and no animal is harder to approach unseen. Again 
and again I have made it out a mile off or rather have seen 
it a mile off when it was pointed out to me, and looking at 
it through my glasses, would see that it was gazing steadily 
at us. It is a striking-looking animal and handsome in its 
way, but its length of leg and neck and sloping back make 
it appear awkward even at rest. When alarmed it may 
go off at a long swinging pace or walk, but if really fright- 
ened it strikes into a peculiar gallop or canter. The tail is 
cocked and twisted, and the huge hind legs are thrown 
forward well to the outside of the forelegs. The movements 
seem deliberate and the giraffe does not appear to be going 
at a fast pace, but if it has any start a horse must gallop 
hard to overtake it. When it starts on this gait, the neck 
may be dropped forward at a sharp angle with the straight 
line of the deep chest, and the big head is thrust in advance. 
They are defenceless things and, though they may kick 
at a man who incautiously comes within reach, they are in 
no way dangerous. 

The following day I again rode out with Captain Slat- 
ter. During the morning we saw nothing except the ordi- 
nary game, and we lunched on a hill-top, ten miles distant 
from camp, under a huge fig-tree with spreading branches 
and thick, deep -green foliage. Throughout the time we 
were taking lunch a herd of zebras watched us from near 
by, standing motionless with their ears pricked forward, 



ON SAFARI. RHINO AND GIRAFFE 



lis 



their beautifully striped bodies showing finely in the sun- 
light. We scanned the country round about with our 
glasses, and made out first a herd of elands, a mile in 
our rear, and then three giraffes a mile and a half in our 
front. I wanted a bull eland, but I wanted a giraffe still 
more, and we mounted 
our horses and rode tow- 
ard where the three tall 
beasts stood, on an open 
hill-side with trees thinly 
scattered over it. Half a 
mile from them we left 
the horses in a thick belt 
of timber beside a dry 
watercourse, and went 
forward on foot. 

There was no use in 
trying a stalk, for that 
would merely have 
aroused the giraffe's sus- 
picion. But we knew 
they were accustomed to 
the passing and repassing 
of Wakamba men and 
women, whom they did 
not fear if they kept at 
a reasonable distance, so 
we walked in single file 
diagonally in their direc- 
tion; that is, toward a tree which I judged to be about 
three hundred yards from them. I was carrying the Win- 
chester loaded with full metal-patched bullets. I wished to 
get for the museum both a bull and a cow. One of the 
three giraffes was much larger than the other two, and as 
he was evidently a bull I thought the two others were cows. 

As we reached the tree the giraffes showed symptoms 
of uneasiness. One of the smaller ones began to make off, 




Masai Elmoran, Machakos road station 
From a photograph by Edmund Hellet 



114 AFRICAN GAI^IE TRAILS 

and both the others shifted their positions slightly, curling 
their tails. I instantly dropped on my knee, and getting the 
bead just behind the big bull's shoulder, I fired with the 
three-hundred-yard sight. I heard the *'pack" of the bullet 
as it struck just where I aimed; and away went all three 
giraffes at their queer rocking-horse canter. Running for- 
ward I emptied my magazine, firing at the big bull and also 
at one of his smaller companions, and then, slipping into 
the barrel what proved to be a soft-nosed bullet, I fired at 
the latter again. The giraffe was going straightaway and 
it was a long shot, at four or five hundred yards; but by 
good luck the bullet broke its back and down it came. 
The others were now getting over the crest of the hill, 
but the big one was evidently sick, and we called and 
beckoned to the two saises to hurry up with the horses. 
The moment they arrived we jumped on, and Captain 
Slatter cantered up a neighboring hill so as to mark the 
direction in which the giraffes went if I lost sight of them. 
Meanwhile I rode full speed after the giant quarry. I 
was on the tranquil sorrel, the horse I much preferred in 
riding down game of any kind, because he had a fair turn 
of speed, and yet was good about letting me get on and off. 
As soon as I reached the hill-crest I saw the giraffes ahead 
of me, not as far off as I had feared, and I raced toward them 
without regard to rotten ground and wart-hog holes. The 
wounded one lagged behind, but when I got near he put 
on a spurt, and as I thought I was close enough I leaped 
off, throwing the reins over the sorrel's head, and opened 
fire. Down went the big bull, and I thought my task was 
done. But as I went back to mount the sorrel he struggled 
to his feet again and disappeared after his companion 
among the trees, which were thicker here, as we had reached 
the bottom of the valley. So I tore after him again, and in 
a minute came to a dry watercourse. Scrambling into 
and out of this I saw the giraffes ahead of me just begin- 
ning the ascent of the opposite slope; and touching the 
horse with the spur we flew after the wounded bull. This 



I 



ON SAFARI. RHINO AND GIRAFFE 



115 



time I made up my mind I would get up close enough; but 
Tranquillity did not quite like the look of the thing ahead 
of him. He did not refuse to come up to the giraffe, but he 
evidently felt that, with such an object close by and evident 
in the landscape, it behooved him to be careful as to what 




A young bull giraflfe, shot by Mr. Roosevelt at Kilimakiu 
Front a photograph by Edmund Heller 



might be hidden therein, and he shied so at each bush we 
passed that we progressed in series of loops. So off I jumped, 
throwing the reins over his head, and opened fire once more; 
and this time the great bull went down for good. 

Tranquillity recovered his nerve at once and grazed 
contentedly while I admired the huge proportions and 
beautiful coloring of my prize. In a few minutes Captain 
Slatter loped up, and the gun-bearers and saises followed. 



116 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

As if by magic, three or four Wakamba turned up immedi- 
ately afterward, their eyes glistening at the thought of the 
feast ahead for the whole tribe. It was mid-afternoon, 
and there was no time to waste. My sais, Simba, an excel- 
lent long-distance runner, was sent straight to camp to get 
Heller and pilot him back to the dead giraffes. Beside 
each of the latter, for they had fallen a mile apart, we left 
a couple of men to build fires. Then we rode toward camp. 
To my regret, the smaller giraffe turned out to be a young 
bull and not a cow. 

At this very time, and utterly without our knowledge, 
there was another giraffe hunt going on. Sir Alfred had 
taken out Kermit and MedHcott, and they came across a 
herd of a dozen giraffes right out in the open plains. Med- 
licott*s horse was worn out and he could not keep up, but 
both the others were fairly well mounted. Both were light 
men and hard riders, and although the giraffes had three- 
quarters of a mile the start, it was not long before both 
were at the heels of the herd. They singled out the big bull, 
which by the way turned out to be an even bigger bull than 
mine, and fired at him as they galloped. In such a head- 
long helter-skelter chase, however, it is no easy matter to 
score a hit from horseback unless one is very close up; and 
Sir Alfred made up his mind to try to drive out the bull 
from the rest of the herd. He succeeded; but at this mo- 
ment his horse put a forefoot into a hole and turned a com- 
plete somersault, almost wrenching out his shoulder. Sir 
Alfred was hurled off head over heels, but even as he rolled 
over, clutching his rifle, he twisted himself round to his 
knees, and took one last shot at the flying giraffe. This 
left Kermit alone and he galloped hard on the giraffe's 
heels, firing again and again with his Winchester. Finally 
his horse became completely done out and fell behind; 
whereupon Kermit jumped off, and being an excellent 
long-distance runner, ran after the giraffe on foot for more 
than a mile. But he did not need to shoot again. The 
great beast had been mortally wounded and it suddenly 



II 



118 AFRICAN GAME TRAH^S 

slowed down, halted, and fell over dead. As a matter of 
curiosity we kept the Winchester bullets both from Ker- 
mit's giraffe and from mine. I made a point of keeping 
as many as possible of the bullets with which the different 
animals were slain so as to see just what was done by the 
different types of rifles we had with us. 

When I reached camp I found that Heller had already 
started. Next morning I rode down to see him and found 
him hard at work with the skins; but as it would take him 
two or three days to finish them and put them in condition 
for transport, we decided that the safari should march 
back to the Potha camp, and that from thence we would 
send Percival's ox wagon to bring back to the camp all the 
skins, Heller and his men accompanying him. The plan 
was carried out, and the following morning we shifted the 
big camp as proposed. 

Heller, thus left behind, came near having an unpleas- 
ant adventure. He slept in his own tent, and his Wakamba 
skinners slept under the fly not far off. One night they 
let the fires die dowji and were roused at midnight by 
hearing the grunting of a hungry lion apparently not a 
dozen yards off in the darkness. Heller quickly lit his 
lantern and sat up with his shot-gun loaded with bird shot, 
the only weapon he had with him. The lion walked round 
and round the tent, grunting at intervals. Then, after some 
minutes of suspense, he drew off. While the grunting had 
been audible, not a sound came from the tent of the Wa- 
kambas, who all cowered under their blankets in perfect 
silence. But once he had gone there was a great chatter- 
ing and in a few minutes the fires were roarings nor were 
they again suffered to die down. 

Heller's skinners had grown to work very well when 
under his eye. He had encountered much difficulty in get- 
ting men who would do the work, and had tried the rep- 
resentatives of various tribes, but without success until 
he struck the Wakamba. These were real savages who 
filed their teeth and delighted in raw flesh, and Heller's 



« 



ON SAFARI. RHINO AND GIRAFFE 



119 



explanation of their doing well was that their taste for the 
raw flesh kept them thoroughly interested in their job, so 
that they learned without difficulty. The porters speedily 
christened each of the white men by some title of their 
own, using the ordinary Swahili title of Bwana (master) as 
a prefix. Heller was the Bwana Who Skinned; Loring, 
who collected the small mammals, was named^ merely 
descriptively, the Mouse Master, Bwana Pania. I was 




The Percival family 
From a photograph by Edmund Heller 

always called Bwana Makuba, the chief or Great Master; 
Kermit was first called Bwana Medogo, the young mas- 
ter, and afterward was christened '' the Dandy," Bwana 
Merodadi. 

From Potha the safari went in two days to McMillan's 
place, Juja Farm, on the other side of the Athi. I stayed 
behind, as I desired to visit the American Mission Station 
at Machakos. Accordingly, Sir Alfred and I rode thither. 
Machakos has long been a native town, for it was on the 
route formerly taken by the Arab caravans that went from 
the coast to the interior after slaves and ivory. Riding 
toward it we passed herd after herd of cattle, sheep, and 
goats, each guarded by two or three savage herdsmen. 
The little town itself was both interesting and attractive. 



120 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

Besides the natives there were a number of Indian traders 
and the EngHsh commissioner and assistant commissioner, 
with a small body of native soldiers. The latter not a long 
time before had been just such savages as those round about 
them, and the change for the better wrought in their phy- 
sique and morale by the ordered discipline to which they 
had submitted themselves could hardly be exaggerated. 
When we arrived, the commissioner and his assistant were 
engaged in cross-examining some neighboring chiefs as to 
the cattle sickness. The English rule in Africa has been 
of incalculable benefit to Africans themselves, and indeed 
this is true of the rule of most European nations. Mistakes 
have been made, of course, but they have proceeded at least 
as often from an unwise effort to accomplish too much 
in the way of beneficence, as from a desire to exploit the 
natives. Each of the civilized nations that has taken posses- 
sion of any part of Africa has had its own peculiar good 
qualities and its own peculiar defects. Some of them have 
done too much in supervising and ordering the lives of the 
natives, and in interfejing with their practices and customs. 
The English error, like our own under similar conditions, 
has, if anything, been in the other direction. The effort 
has been to avoid wherever possible all interference with 
tribal customs, even when of an immoral and repulsive 
character, and to do no more than what is obviously neces- 
sary, such as insistence upon keeping the peace and prevent- 
ing the spread of cattle disease. Excellent reasons can be 
advanced in favor of this policy, and it must always be 
remembered that a fussy and ill-considered benevolence is 
more sure to awaken resentment than cruelty itself; while 
the natives are apt to resent deeply even things that are ob- 
viously for their ultimate welfare. Yet I cannot help think- 
ing that with caution and wisdom it would be possible to 
proceed somewhat farther than has yet been the case in 
the direction of pushing upward some at least of the East 
African tribes: and this though I recognize fully that many 
of these tribes are of a low and brutalized type. Having 



I 



ON SAFAKI. RHINO AND GIRAFFE 



121 



said this much in the way ot criticism, I wish to add my 
tribute of unstinted admiration for the disinterested and 
efficient work being done, aHke in the interest of the white 
man and the black, by the government officials whom I 




Group of skin-laden mules passing by the Bondoni waterhole on 

their way to the railroad 

From a photograph by Kerinit Roosevelt 

met in East Africa. They are men in whom their country 
has every reason to feel a just pride. 

We lunched with the American missionaries. Mission 
work among savages offers many difficulties, and often the 
wisest and most earnest effort meets with dishearteningly 
little reward; while lack of common-sense, and of course, 
above all, lack of a firm and resolute disinterestedness, in- 
sures the worst kind of failure. There are missionaries who 
do not do well, just as there are men in every conceivable 
walk of life who do not do well; and excellent men who 
are not missionaries, including both government officials 



122 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

and settlers, are only too apt to jump at the chance of criti- 
cising a missionary for every alleged sin of either omission 
or commission. Finally, zealous missionaries, fervent in the 
faith, do not always find it easy to remember that sav- 
ages can only be raised by slow steps, that an empty adhe- 
rence to forms and ceremonies amounts to nothing, that 
industrial training is an essential in any permanent upward 
movement, and that the gradual elevation of mind and 
character is a prerequisite to the achievement of any kind 
of Christianity which is worth calling such. Nevertheless, 
after all this has been said, it remains true that the good 
done by missionary effort in Africa has been incalculable. 
There are parts of the great continent, and among them 
I include many sections of East Africa, which can be made 
a white man's country; and in these parts every effort 
should be made to favor the growth of a large and prosperous 
white population. But over most of Africa the problem for 
the white man is to govern, with wisdom and firmness, and 
when necessary with severity, but always with an eye single 
to their own interests and development, the black and brown 
races. To do this needs sympathy and devotion no less than 
strength and wisdom, and in the task the part to be played 
by the missionary and the part to be played by the official 
are alike great, and the two should work hand in hand. 

After returning from Machakos, I spent the night at Sir 
Alfred's, and next morning said good-by with most genu- 
ine regret to my host and his family. Then, followed by 
my gun-bearers and sais, I rode off across the Athi Plains. 
Through the bright white air the sun beat down merci- 
lessly, and the heat haze wavered above the endless flats 
of scorched grass. Hour after hour we went slowly for- 
ward, through the morning, and through the burning heat 
of the equatorial noon, until in mid-afternoon we came to 
the tangled tree growth which fringed the half-dried bed of 
the Athi. Here I off-saddled for an hour; then, mounting, 
I crossed the river-bed where it was waterless, and before 
evening fell I rode up to Juja Farm. 



CHAPTER V 

JUJA FARM; HIPPO AND LEOPARD 

At Juja Farm we were welcomed with the most gener- 
ous hospitahty by my fellow-countryman and his wife, Mr. 
and Mrs. W. N. McMillan. Selous had been staying with 
them, and one afternoon I had already ridden over from 
Sir Alfred's ranch to take tea with them at their other house, 
on the beautiful Mua hills. 

Juja Farm lies on the edge of the Athi Plains, and the 
house stands near the junction of the Nairobi and Rewero 
Rivers. The house, like almost all East African houses, 
was of one story, a broad, vine-shaded veranda running 
around it. There were numerous out-buildings of every 
kind; there were flocks and herds, cornfields, a vegetable 
garden, and, immediately in front of the house, a very 
pretty flower garden, carefully tended by unsmiling Ki- 
kuyu savages. All day long these odd creatures worked 
at the grass and among the flower beds; according to the 
custom of their tribe their ears were slit so as to enable 
them to stretch the lobes to an almost unbelievable extent, 
and in these apertures they wore fantastically carved na- 
tive ornaments. One of them had been attracted by the 
shining surface of an empty tobacco can, and he wore this 
in one ear to match the curiously carved wooden drum he 
carried in the other. Another, whose arms and legs were 
massive with copper and iron bracelets, had been given a 
blanket because he had no other garment; he got along 
quite well with the blanket excepting when he had to use 
the lawn mower, and then he would usually wrap the blan- 
ket around his neck and handle the lawn mower with the 
evident feeling that he had done all that the most exacting 
conventionalism could require. 

123 



124 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

The house boys and gun-bearers, and most of the boys 
who took care of the horses, were Somahs, whereas the 
cattle-keepers who tended the herds of cattle were Masai, 
and the men and women who worked in the fields were 
Kikuyus. The three races had nothing to do with one 
another, and the few Indians had nothing to do with any of 
them. The Kikuyus lived in their beehive huts scattered 
in small groups; the Somalis all dwelt in their own little 
village on one side of the farm; and half a mile off the 
Masai dwelt in their village. Both the Somalis and Masai 
were fine, daring fellows; the Somalis were Mohammedans 
and horsemen; the Masai were cattle-herders, who did their 
work as they did their fighting, on foot, and were wild 
heathen of the most martial type. They looked carefully 
after the cattle, and were delighted to join in the chase of 
dangerous game, but regular work they thoroughly de- 
spised. Sometimes when we had gathered a mass of Ki- 
kuyus or of our own porters together to do some job, two or 
three Masai would stroll up to look on with curiosity, sword 
in belt and great spear in hand; their features were well cut, 
their hair curiously plaited, and they had the erect carriage 
and fearless bearing that naturally go with a soldierly race. 

Within the house, with its bedrooms and dining-room, 
its library and drawing-room, and the cool, shaded veranda, 
everything was so comfortable that it was hard to realize 
that we were far in the interior of Africa and almost under 
the equator. Our hostess was herself a good rider and 
good shot, and had killed her lion; and both our host and 
a friend who was staying with him, Mr. Bulpett, were not 
merely mighty hunters who had bagged every important 
variety of large and dangerous game, but were also ex- 
plorers of note, whose travels had materially helped in 
widening the area of our knowledge of what was once 
the dark continent. 

Many birds sang in the garden, bulbuls, thrushes, and 
warblers; and from the narrow fringe of dense woodland 
along the edges of the rivers other birds called loudly, some 



JUJA FARM; HIPPO AND LEOPARD 



125 




I he huu^c at Juja Farm 
Frotii a pliotograph by J. A Iden Loriiig 

with harsh, some with musical voices. Here for the first 
time we saw the honey-guide, the bird that insists upon 
leading any man it sees to honey, so that he may rob the 
hive and give it a share. 

Game came right around the house. Hartebeests, wilde- 
beests, and zebras grazed in sight on the open plain. The 
hippopotami that lived close by in the river came out at 
night into the garden. A couple of years before a rhino 
had come down into the same garden in broad daylight, 
and quite wantonly attacked one of the Kikuyu laborers, 
tossing him and breaking his thigh. It had then passed 
by the house out to the plain, where it saw an ox cart, 
which it immediately attacked and upset, cannoning off 
after its charge and passing up through the span of 
oxen, breaking all the yokes but fortunately not killing an 
animal. Then it met one of the men of the house on 
horseback, immediately assailed him, and was killed for 
its pains. 

My host was about to go on safari for a couple of 
months with Selous, and to manage their safari they had 



12« AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

one of the noted professional hunters of East Africa, Mr. 
H. Judd; and Judd was kind enough to take me out hunt- 
ing almost every day that we were at Juja. We would 
breakfast at dawn and leave the farm about the time that 
it grew light enough to see: ordinarily our course was 
eastward, toward the Athi, a few miles distant. These 
morning rides were very beautiful. In our front was the 
mountain mass of Donyo Sabuk, and the sun rose behind 
it, flooding the heavens with gold and crimson. The 
morning air blew fresh in our faces, and the unshod feet 
of our horses made no sound as they trod the dew-drenched 
grass. On every side game stood to watch us^ herds of 
hartebeests and zebras, and now and then a herd of wilde- 
beests or a few straggling old wildebeest bulls. Sometimes 
the zebras and kongoni were very shy, and took fright 
when we were yet a long way off^; at other times they would 
stand motionless and permit us to come within fair gun- 
shot, and after we had passed we could still see them re- 
garding us without their having moved. The wildebeests 
were warier; usually when we were yet a quarter of a mile 
or so distant, the herd, which had been standing with heads 
up, their short, shaggy necks and heavy withers giving the 
animals an unmistakable look, would take fright, and, 
with heavy curvets, and occasional running in semicircles, 
would make off, heads held down and long tails lashing 
the air. 

In the open woods which marked the border between 
the barren plains and the forested valley of the Athi, Kermit 
and I shot waterbuck and impalla. The waterbuck is a 
stately antelope with long, coarse gray hair and fine car- 
riage of the head and neck; the male alone carries horns. 
We found them usually in parties of ten or a dozen, both 
of bulls and cows; but sometimes a party of cows would go 
alone, or three or four bulls might be found together. In 
spite of its name, we did not find it much given to going in 
the water, although it would cross the river fearlessly when- 
ever it desired; it was, however, always found not very far 



JTJA FARM; HIPPO AND LEOPARD 



127 



from water. It liked the woods and did not go many miles 
from the streams, yet we frequently saw it on the open 
plains a mile or two from trees, feeding in the vicinity of 
the zebra and the hartebeest. This was, however, usually 
quite early in the morning or quite late in the afternoon. 




Masai wan^v-.c ..^^. ..^Millan's ranch on the Mua hills 
From a photograph by Kermit Roosevtlt 

In the heat of the day it clearly preferred to be in the for- 
est, along the stream's edge, or in the bush-clad ravines. 

The impalla are found in exactly the same kind of 
country as the waterbuck, and often associate with them. 
To my mind they are among the most beautiful of all ante- 
lope. They are about the size of a white-tailed deer, their 
beautiful annulated horns making a single spiral, and 



128 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

their coat is like satin with its contrasting shades of red 
and white. They have the most graceful movements of 
any animal I know, and it is extraordinary to see a herd 
start off when frightened, both bucks and does bounding 
clear over the tops of the tall bushes, with a peculiar bird- 
like motion and lightness. Usually a single old buck will 
be found with a large company of does and fawns; the 
other bucks go singly or in small parties. It was in the 
middle of May, and we saw fawns of all ages. When in 
the open, where, like the waterbuck, it often went in the 
morning and evening, the impalla was very shy, but I did 
not find it particularly so among the woods. In connection 
with shooting two of the impalla, there occurred little inci- 
dents which are worthy of mention. 

In one case I had just killed a waterbuck cow, hitting 
it at a considerable distance and by a lucky fluke, after a 
good deal of bad shooting. We started the porters in with 
the waterbuck, and then rode west through an open coun- 
try, dotted here and there with trees and with occasional 
ant-hills. In a few minutes we saw an impalla buck, and 
I crept up behind an ant-hill and obtained a shot at about 
two hundred and fifty yards. The buck dropped, and as I 
was putting in another cartridge I said to Judd that I 
didn't like to see an animal drop like that, so instanta- 
neously, as there was always the possibility that it might 
only be creased, and that if an animal so hurt got up, it 
always went off exactly as if unhurt. When we raised our 
eyes again to look for the impalla it had vanished. I was 
sure that we would never see it again, and Judd felt much 
the same way, but we walked in the direction toward which 
its head had been pointed, and Judd ascended an ant-hill 
to scan the surrounding country with his glasses. He did 
so, and after a minute remarked that he could not see the 
wounded impalla; when a sudden movement caused us 
to look down, and there it was, lying at our very feet, on 
the side of the ant-hill, unable to rise. I had been using a 
sharp-pointed bullet in the Springfield, and this makes 



JUJA FARM; HIPPO AND LEOPARD 



129 



a big hole. The bullet had gone too far back, in front of 
the hips. I should not have wondered at all if the animal 
had failed to get up after falling, but I did not understand 
why, as it recovered enough from the shock to be able to 
get up, it had not continued to travel, instead of falling 
after going one hundred yards. Indeed, I am inclined to 
think that a deer or prongbuck, hit in the same fashion, 
would have gone off and would 
have given a long chase before 
being overtaken. Judging from 
what others have said, I have 
no doubt that African game 
is very tough and succumbs 
less easily to wounds than is 
the case with animals of the 
northern temperate zone; but 
in my own experience, I several 
times saw African antelopes 
succumb to wounds quicker 
than the average northern ani- 
mal would have succumbed to 
a similar wound. One was this 
impalla. Another was the cow 
eland I first shot; her hind leg 
was broken high up, and the 
wound, though crippling, was 
not such as would have pre- 
vented a moose or wapiti from 
hobbling away on three legs; yet in spite of hard struggles 
the eland was wholly unable to regain her feet. 

The impalla thus shot, by the way, although in fine 
condition and the coat of glossy beauty, was infested by 
ticks; around the horns the horrid little insects were clus- 
tered in thick masses for a space of a diameter of some 
inches. It was to me marvellous that they had not set 
up inflammation or caused great sores, for they were so 
thick that at a distance of a few feet they gave the appear- 




riead of a waterbuck bull shot by 

Kermit Roosevelt 
From a phfltpgraph by Edmund Heller 



130 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

ance of there being some big gland or bare place at the root 
of each horn. 

The other impalla buck also showed an unexpected 
softness, succumbing to a wound which I do not believe 
would have given me either a white-tailed or a black-tailed 
deer. I had been vainly endeavoring to get a waterbuck 
bull, and as the day was growing hot I was riding home- 
ward, scanning the edge of the plain where it merged into 
the trees that extended out from the steep bank that hemmed 
in one side of the river-bottom. From time to time we 
would see an impalla or a waterbuck making its way from 
the plain back to the river-bottom, to spend the day in the 
shade. One of these I stalked, and after a good deal of 
long-range shooting broke a hind leg high up. It got out 
of sight and we rode along the edge of the steep descent 
which ltd down into the river-bottom proper. In the bot- 
tom there were large, open, grassy places, while the trees 
made a thick fringe along the river course. We had given 
up the impalla and turned out toward the plain, when one 
of my gun-bearers whistled to us and said he had seen the 
wounded animal cross the bottom and go into the fringe 
of trees bounding a deep pool in which we knew there were 
both hippos and crocodiles. We were off our horses at 
once, and, leaving them at the top, scrambled down the 
descent and crossed the bottom to the spot indicated. The 
impalla had lain down as soon as it reached cover, and as 
we entered the fringe of wood I caught a glimpse of it 
getting up and making off. Yet fifty yards farther it 
stopped again, standing right on the brink of the pool, so 
close that when I shot it, it fell over into the water. 

When, after arranging for this impalla to be carried 
back to the farm, we returned to where our horses had 
been left, the boys told us with much excitement that there 
was a large snake near by; and sure enough a few yards 
off, coiled up in the long grass under a small tree, was a 
python. I could not see it distinctly, and using a solid bul- 
let I just missed the backbone, the bullet going through 



JTJA FARM; HIPPO AND LEOPARD 



131 



the body about its middle. Immediately the snake lashed 
at me with open jaws, and then, uncoiling, came gliding 
rapidly in our direction. I do not think it was charging; 
I think it was merely trying to escape. But Judd, who 
was utterly unmoved by lion, leopard, or rhino, evidently 
held this snake in respect, and yelled to me to get out of 
the way. Accordingly, I jumped back a few feet, and the 




The python 
From a photograph by IV. N. McMillan 

snake came over the ground where I had stood; its evil 
genius then made it halt for a moment and raise its head 
to a height of perhaps three feet, and I killed it by a shot 
through the neck. The porters were much wrought up 
about the snake, and did not at all like my touching it and 
taking it up, first by the tail and then by the head. It was 
only twelve feet long. We tied it to a long stick and sent 
it in by two porters. 

Another day we beat for lions, but without success. 
We rode to a spot a few miles off, where we were joined by 
three Boer farmers. They were big, upstanding men, 



132 AFRICAN GAI^IE TRAILS 

looking just as Boer farmers ought to look who had been 
through a war and had ever since led the adventurous life 
of frontier farmers in wild regions. They were accom- 
panied by a pack of big, rough-looking dogs, but were 
on foot, walking with long and easy strides. The dogs 
looked a rough-and-ready lot, but on this particular morn- 
ing showed themselves of little use; at any rate they put 
up nothing. 

But Kermit had a bit of deserved good luck. While 
the main body of us went down the river-bed, he and Mc- 
Millan, with a few natives, beat up a side ravine, down 
the middle of which ran the usual dry watercourse fringed 
with patches of brush. In one of these they put up a leop- 
ard, and saw it slinking forward ahead of them through 
the bushes. Then they lost sight of it, and came to the con- 
clusion that it was in a large thicket. So Kermit went on 
one side of it and McMillan on the other, and the beaters 
approached to try and get the leopard out. Of course none 
of the beaters had guns; their function was merely to make 
a disturbance and rouse the game, and they were cautioned 
on no account to get into danger. But the leopard did not 
wait to be driven. Without any warning, out he came and 
charged straight at Kermit, who stopped him when he was 
but six yards off with a bullet in the forepart of the body; 
the leopard turned, and as he galloped back Kermit hit him 
again, crippling him in the hips. The w^ounds were fatal, 
and they would have knocked the fight out of any animal 
less plucky and savage than the leopard; but not even in 
Africa is there a beast of more unflinching courage than 
this spotted cat. The beaters were much excited by the 
sight of the charge and the way in which it was stopped, 
and they pressed jubilantly forward, too heedlessly; one 
of them, who was on McMillan's side of the thicket, went 
too near it, and out came the wounded leopard at him. 
It was badly crippled or it would have got the beater at 
once; as it was, it was slowly overtaking him as he ran 
through the tall grass, when McMillan, standing on an 



JUJA FARM; HIPPO AND LEOPARD 



133 



ant-heap, shot it again. Yet, in spite of having this third 
bullet in it, it ran down the beater and seized him, worrying 
him with teeth and claws; but it was weak because of its 
wounds, and the powerful savage wrenched himself free, 
while McMillan fired into the beast again; and back it 
went through the long grass into the thicket. There was a 












Kermit Roosevelt and the leopard 
From a J'liotograpli hy II'. .V. McMUlnn 



pause, and the wounded beater was removed to a place of 
safety, while a messenger was sent on to us to bring up 
the Boer dogs. But while they were waiting, the leopard, 
on its own initiative, brought matters to a crisis, for out it 
came again straight at Kermit, and this time it dropped 
dead to Kermit's bullet. No animal could have shown 
a more fearless and resolute temper. It was an old female, 
but small, its weight being a little short of seventy pounds. 
The smallest female cougar I ever killed was heavier than 
this, and one very big male cougar which I killed in Colo- 



134 



AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 



rado was three times the weight. Yet I have never heard 
of any cougar which displayed anything Hke the spirit 
and ferocity of this httle leopard, or which in any way 
approached it as a dangerous foe. It was sent back to 
camp in company with the wounded beater, after the 
wounds of the latter had been dressed; they were not seri- 
ous, and he was speedily as well 
^^^^ as ever. 

^^^^^L The rivers that bounded Juja 

^^^^^^^k Farm, not only the Athi, but the 

^BHJKIr Nairobi and Rewero, contained 

^^^^Iw hippopotami and crocodiles in 

-^ the deep pools. I was particu- 

larly anxious to get one of the 
former, and early one morning 
Judd and I rode off across the 
plains, through the herds of graz- 
ing game seen dimly in the dawn, 
to the Athi. We reached the 
river, and, leaving our horses, 
went down into the wooded bot- 
tom, soon after sunrise. Judd 
had with him a Masai, a keen- 
eyed hunter, and I my two gun- 
bearers. We advanced with the 
utmost caution toward the brink 
of a great pool; on our way we 
saw a bushbuck, but of course did not dare to shoot at it, 
for hippopotami are wary, except in very unfrequented 
regions, and any noise will disturb them. As we crept 
noiselessly up to the steep bank which edged the pool, the 
sight was typically African. On the still water floated a 
crocodile, nothing but his eyes and nostrils visible. The 
bank was covered with a dense growth of trees, festooned 
with vines; among the branches sat herons; a little cormo- 
rant dived into the water; and a very small and brilliantly 
colored kingfisher, with a red beak and large turquoise 




Native boy carryinjj; in a leopard 
shot by Kermit Roosevelt near 
Juja Ranch 
Prom a photograph by Kermit Roosevelt 



JUJA FARM; HIPPO AND LEOPARD 



137 



crest, perched unheedingly within a few feet of us. Here 
and there a dense growth of the tall and singularly grace- 
ful papyrus rose out of the water, the feathery heads, which 
crowned the long smooth green stems, waving gently to 
and fro. 

We scanned the waters carefully, and could see no sign 
of hippos, and, still proceeding with the utmost caution, we 




Judd permaiiganating the beater who was mauled b.y the leopard 
From a photograph by W. N. McMillan 



moved a hundred yards farther down to another lookout. 
Here the Masai detected a hippo head a long way off on 
the other side of the pool; and we again drew back and 
started cautiously forward to reach the point opposite which 
he had seen the head. 

But we were not destined to get that hippo. Just as 
we had about reached the point at which we had intended 
to turn in toward the pool, there was a succession of snorts 
in our front and the sound of the trampling of heavy feet 



138 APRICAN GAME TRAILS 

and of a big body being shoved through a dense mass of 
tropical bush. My companions called to me in loud whis- 
pers that it was a rhinoceros coming at us, and to ** Shoot, 
shoot/' In another moment the rhinoceros appeared, twitch- 
ing its tail and tossing and twisting its head from side to 
side as it came toward us. It did not seem to have very 
good horns, and I would much rather not have killed it; 
but there hardly seemed any alternative, for it certainly 
showed every symptom of being bent on mischief. My 
first shot, at under forty yards, produced no effect what- 
ever, except to hasten its approach. I was using the Win- 
chester, with full-jacketed bullets; my second bullet went 
in between the neck and shoulder, bringing it to a halt. I 
fired into the shoulder again, and as it turned toward the 
bush I fired into its flank both the bullets still remaining 
in my magazine. 

For a moment or two after it disappeared we heard 
the branches crash, and then there was silence. In such 
cover a wounded rhino requires cautious handling, and as 
quietly as possible we walked through the open forest 
along the edge of the dense thicket into which the animal 
had returned. The thicket was a tangle of thorn-bushes, 
reeds, and small, low-branching trees; it was impossible 
to see ten feet through it, and a man could only penetrate 
it with the utmost slowness and difficulty, whereas the 
movements of the rhino were very little impeded. At the 
far end of the thicket we examined the grass to see if the 
rhino had passed out, and sure enough there was the spoor, 
with so much blood along both sides that it was evident 
the animal was badly hit. It led across this space and into 
another thicket of the same character as the first; and 
again we stole cautiously along the edge some ten yards 
out. I had taken the heavy Holland double-barrel, and 
with the safety catch pressed forward under my thumb, I 
trod gingerly through the grass, peering into the thicket 
and expectant of developments. In a minute there was 
a furious snorting and crashing directly opposite us in the 



JUJA FARM; HIPPO AND LEOPARD 



139 



thicket, and I brought up my rifle; but the rhino did not 
quite place us, and broke out of the cover in front, some 
thirty yards away; and I put both barrels into and behind 
the shoulder. The terrific striking force of the heavy gun 
told at once, and the rhino wheeled, and struggled back 
into the thicket, and we heard it fall. With the utmost 




The second rhino 
From a photograph by J. A Iden Loring 



caution, bending and creeping under the branches, we made 
our way in, and saw the beast lying with its head toward us. 
We thought it was dead, but would take no chances; and I 
put in another, but as it proved needless, heavy bullet. 

It was an old female, considerably smaller than the bull 
I had already shot, with the front horn measuring four- 
teen inches as against his nineteen inches; as always with 
rhinos, it was covered with ticks, which clustered thickly 
in the folds and creases of the skin, around and in the ears, 



140 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

and in all the tender places. McMillan sent out an ox 
wagon and brought it in to the house, where we weighed it. 
It was a little over two thousand two hundred pounds. 
It had evidently been in the neighborhood in which we 
found it for a considerable time, for a few hundred yards 
away we found its stamping ground, a circular spot where 
the earth had been all trampled up and kicked about, ac- 
cording to the custom of rhinoceroses; they return day 
after day to such places to deposit their dung, which is then 
kicked about with the hind feet. As with all our other 
specimens, the skin was taken off and sent back to the 
National Museum. The stomach was filled with leaves 
and twigs, this kind of rhinoceros browsing on the tips of 
the branches by means of its hooked, prehensile upper lip. 
Now I did not want to kill this rhinoceros, and I am 
not certain that it really intended to charge us. It may 
very well be that if we had stood firm it would, after much 
threatening and snorting, have turned and made ofi^; vet- 
eran hunters like Selous could, I doubt not, have afforded 
to wait and see what happened. But I let it get within forty 
yards, and it still showed every symptom of meaning mis- 
chief, and at a shorter range I could not have been sure of 
stopping it in time. Often under such circumstances the 
rhino does not mean to charge at all, and is acting in a 
spirit of truculent and dull curiosity; but often, when its 
motions and actions are indistinguishable from those of an 
animal which does not mean mischief, it turns out that a 
given rhino does mean mischief. A year before I arrived 
in East Africa a surveyor was charged by a rhinoceros 
entirely without provocation; he was caught and killed. 
Chanler's companion on his long expedition, the Austrian 
Von Hohnel, was very severely wounded by a rhino and 
nearly died; the animal charged through the line of march 
of the safari, and then deliberately turned, hunted down 
Von Hohnel, and tossed him. Again and again there have 
been such experiences, and again and again hunters who 
did not wish to kill rhinos have been forced to do so in 



JUJA FARM; HIPPO AND LEOPARD 141 

order to prevent mischief. Under such circumstances it is 
not to be expected that men will take too many chances 
when face to face with a creature whose actions are threat- 
ening and whose intentions it is absolutely impossible to 
divine. In fact, I do not see how the rhinoceros can be per- 
manently preserved, save in very out-of-the-way places or 
in regular game reserves. There is enough interest and ex- 
citement in the pursuit to attract every eager young hunter, 
and, indeed, very many eager old hunters; and the beast's 
stupidity, curiosity, and truculence make up a combination 
of qualities which inevitably tend to insure its destruction. 

As we brought home the whole body of this rhinoceros, 
and as I had put into it eight bullets, five from the Win- 
chester and three from the Holland, I was able to make 
a tolerably fair comparison between the two. With the 
full-jacketed bullets of the Winchester I had mortally 
wounded the animal; it would have died in a short time, 
and it was groggy when it came out of the brush in its 
final charge; but they inflicted no such smashing blow as 
the heavy bullets of the Holland. Moreover, when they 
struck the heavy bones they tended to break into frag- 
ments, while the big Holland bullets ploughed through. 
The Winchester and the Springfield were the weapons 
one of which I always carried in my own hand, and for 
any ordinary game I much preferred them to any other 
rifles. The Winchester did admirably with lions, giraffes, 
elands, and smaller game, and, as will be seen, with hippos. 
For heavy game like rhinoceroses and buffaloes, I found 
that for me personally the heavy Holland was unquestion- 
ably the proper weapon. But in writing this I wish most 
distinctly to assert my full knowledge of the fact that the 
choice of a rifle is almost as much a matter of personal 
idiosyncrasy as the choice of a friend. The above must 
be taken as merely the expression of my personal pref- 
erences. It will doubtless arouse as much objection among 
the ultra-champions of one type of gun as among the ultra- 
champions of another. The truth is that any good modern 



142 AFRICAN GMIE TRAILS 

rifle is good enough. The determining factor is the man 
behind the gun. 

In the afternoon of the day on which we killed the rhino 
Judd took me out again to try for hippos, this time in the 
Rewero, which ran close by the house. We rode upstream 
a couple of miles. Then we sent back our horses and 
walked down the river bank as quietly as possible, Judd 
scanning the pools, and the eddies in the running stream, 
from every point of vantage. Once we aroused a crocodile, 
which plunged into the water. The stream was full of 
fish, some of considerable size; and in the meadow-land on 
our side we saw a gang of big, black wild-geese feeding. 
But we got within half a mile of McMillan's house with- 
out seeing a hippo, and the light was rapidly fading. 
Judd announced that we would go home, but took one last 
look around the next bend, and instantly sank to his knees, 
beckoning to me. I crept forward on all-fours, and he 
pointed out to me an object in the stream, fifty yards off, 
under the overhanging branch of a tree, which jutted out 
from the steep bank opposite. In that light I should not 
myself have recognized it as a hippo head; but it was one, 
looking toward us, with the ears up and the nostrils, eyes, 
and forehead above water. I aimed for the centre; the 
sound told that the bullet had struck somewhere on the 
head, and the animal disappeared without a splash. Judd 
was sure I had killed, but I was by no means so confident 
myself, and there was no way of telling until next morning, 
for the hippo always sinks when shot and does not rise to 
the surface for several hours. Accordingly, back we walked 
to the house. 

At sunrise next morning Cuninghame, Judd, and I, 
with a crowd of porters, were down at the spot. There was 
a very leaky boat in which Cuninghame, Judd, and I 
embarked, intending to drift and paddle downstream while 
the porters walked along the bank. We did not have far 
to go, for as we rounded the first point we heard the por- 
ters break into guttural exclamations of delight, and there 



I 




Towing the hippo shot by Mr. Roosevelt 
From a photograph by W. N. AIcMillau 




Landing the hippo 
From a photograph by IV. N. McMillan 



144 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

ahead of us, by a little island of papyrus, was the dead 
hippo. With the help of the boat it was towed to a con- 
venient landing-j)lace, and then the porters dragged it 
ashore. It was a cow, of good size for one dwelling in a 
small river, where they never approach the dimensions 
of those making their homes in a great lake like the Vic- 
toria Nyanza. This one weighed nearly two thousand eight 
hundred pounds, and I could well believe that a big lake 
bull would weigh between three and four tons. 

In wild regions hippos rest on sandy bars, and even 
come ashore to feed, by day; but wherever there are in- 
habitants they land to feed only at night. Those in the 
Rewero continually entered McMillan's garden. Where 
they are numerous they sometimes attack small boats and 
kill the people in them; and where they are so plentiful 
they do great damage to the plantations of the natives, so 
much so that they then have to be taken off the list of 
preserved game and their destruction encouraged. Their 
enormous jaws sweep in (juantities of plants, or lush grass, 
or corn, or vegetables, at a mouthful, while their appetites 
are as gigantic as their bodies. In spite of their short legs, 
they go at a good gait on shore, but the water is their real 
home, and they always seek it when alarmed. They 
dive and float wonderfully, rising to the surface or sinking 
to the bottom at will, and they gallop at speed along the 
bottoms of lakes or rivers, with their bodies wholly sub- 
merged ; but as is natural enough, in view of their big bodies 
and short legs, they are not fast swimmers for any length 
of time. They make curious and unmistakable trails along 
the banks of any stream in which they dwell; their short 
legs are wide apart, and so when they tread out a path 
they leave a ridge of high soil down the centre. W^here 
they have lived a long time, the rutted paths are worn 
deep into the soil, but always carry this distinguishing 
middle ridge. 

The full-jacketed Winchester bullet had gone straight 
into the brain; the jacket had lodged in the cranium, but 



I 



146 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

the lead went on, entering the neck and breaking the atlas 
vertebra. 

At Juja Farm many animals were kept in cages. They 
included a fairly friendly leopard, and five lions, two of 
which were anything but friendly. There were three 
cheetahs, nearly full-grown; these were continually taken 
out on leashes, Mrs. McMillan strolling about with them 
and leading them to the summer-house. They were good- 
tempered, but they did not lead well. Cheetahs are inter- 
esting beasts; they are aberrant cats, standing very high on 
their legs, and with non-retractile claws like a dog. They 
are. nearly the size of a leopard, but are not ordinarily 
anything like as ferocious, and prey on the smaller antelope, 
occasionally taking something as big as a half-grown kon- 
goni. For a short run, up to say a quarter of a mile or 
even perhaps half a mile, they are the swiftest animals on 
earth, and with a good start easily overtake the fastest 
antelope; but their bolt is soon shot, and on the open plain 
they can readily be galloped down with a horse. When they 
sit on their haunches. their attitude is that neither of a dog 
nor of a cat so much as of a big monkey. On the whole, 
they are much more easily domesticated than most other 
cats, but, as with all highly developed wild creatures, they 
show great individual variability of character and disposi- 
tion. They have a very curious note, a birdlike chirp, in 
uttering which they twist the upper lip as if whistling. When 
I first heard it I was sure that it was uttered by some bird, 
and looked about quite a time before finding that it was the 
call of a cheetah. 

Then there was a tame wart-hog, very friendly, indeed, 
which usually wandered loose, and was as comical as pigs 
generally are, with its sudden starts and grunts. Finally, 
there was a young tommy buck and a Grant's gazelle doe, 
both of which were on good terms with every one and 
needed astonishingly little looking after to prevent their 
straying. When I was returning to the house on the morn- 
ing I killed the rhinoceros, I met the string of porters and 



JUJA FARM: HIPPO AND LEOPARD 



147 



the ox wagon just after they had left the gate on their way 
to the carcass. The Grant doe had been attracted by the 
departure, and was following immediately behind the last 
porter; a wild-looking Masai warrior, to whom, as I learned, 
the especial care of the gazelle had been intrusted for that 
day, was running as hard as he could after her from the 
gate; when he overtook her he ran in between her and the 




.Mrs. McMillan and cheetah 
From a photograph by IV. N. McMillan 



rearmost porter, and headed her for the farm gate, utter- 
ing what sounded like wild war-cries and brandishing his 
spear. They formed a really absurd couple, the little doe 
slowly and decorously walking back to the farm, quite un- 
moved by the clamor and threats, while her guardian, the 
very image of what a savage warrior should look when on 
the war-path, walked close behind, waving his spear and 
uttering deep-toned shouts, with what seemed a ludicrous 
disproportion of effort to the result needed. 

Antelopes speedily become very tame and recognize 



148 AFRICAN GAME TRAILS 

clearly their friends. Leslie Tarlton's brother was keeping 
a couple of young kongoni and a partly grown Grant on 
his farm just outside Nairobi. (The game comes right to 
the outskirts of Nairobi; one morning Kermit walked out 
from the McMillans' town-house, where we were staying, 
in company with Percival, the game ranger, and got pho- 
tographs of zebras, kongoni, and Kavirondo cranes; and a 
leopard sometimes came up through the garden on to the 
veranda of the house itself.) Tarlton's young antelopes 
went freely into the country round about, but never fled 
with the wild herds; and they were not only great friends 
with Tarlton's dogs, but recognized them as protectors. 
Hyenas and other beasts frequently came round the farm 
after nightfall, and at their approach the antelopes fled 
at speed to where the dogs were, and then could not be 
persuaded to leave them. 

We spent a delightful week at Juja Farm, and then 
moved to Kamiti Ranch, the neighboring farm, owned by 
Mr. Hugh H. Heatley, who had asked me to visit him for 
a buffalo hunt. While in the highlands of British East 
Africa it is utterly impossible for a stranger to realize that 
he is under the equator; the climate is delightful and healthy. 
It is a white man's country, a country which should be filled 
with white settlers; and no place could be more attrac- 
tive for visitors. There is no more danger to health inci- 
dent to an ordinary trip to East Africa than there is to an 
ordinary trip to the Riviera. Of course, if one goes on a 
hunting trip there is always a certain amount of risk, in- 
cluding the risk of fever, just as there would be if a man 
camped out in some of the Italian marshes. But the or- 
dinary visitor need have no more fear of his health than if 
he were travelling in Italy, and it is hard to imagine a trip 
better worth making than the trip from Mombasa to Nairobi 
and on to the Victoria Nyanza. 