This is a test document. Dog Dog Dog cat the bone word test. THROUGH THE BRAZILIAN WILDERNESS

                                  BY

                          THEODORE ROOSEVELT



                               PREFACE

  This is an account of a zoo-geographic reconnaissance through the
  Brazilian hinterland.

  The official and proper title of the expedition is that given it
  by the Brazilian Government: Expedicao Scientifica Roosevelt-
  Rondon. When I started from the United States, it was to make an
  expedition, primarily concerned with mammalogy and ornithology,
  for the American Museum of Natural History of New York. This was
  undertaken under the auspices of Messrs. Osborn and Chapman,
  acting on behalf of the Museum. In the body of this work I
  describe how the scope of the expedition was enlarged, and how it
  was given a geographic as well as a zoological character, in
  consequence of the kind proposal of the Brazilian Secretary of
  State for Foreign Affairs, General Lauro Muller. In its altered
  and enlarged form the expedition was rendered possible only by the
  generous assistance of the Brazilian Government. Throughout the
  body of the work will be found reference after reference to my
  colleagues and companions of the expedition, whose services to
  science I have endeavored to set forth, and for whom I shall
  always feel the most cordial friendship and regard.

  THEODORE ROOSEVELT.
  SAGAMORE HILL,
  September 1, 1914





                   THROUGH THE BRAZILIAN WILDERNESS



                             I. THE START

One day in 1908, when my presidential term was coming to a close,
Father Zahm, a priest whom I knew, came in to call on me. Father Zahm
and I had been cronies for some time, because we were both of us fond
of Dante and of history and of science--I had always commended to
theologians his book, "Evolution and Dogma." He was an Ohio boy, and
his early schooling had been obtained in old-time American fashion in
a little log school; where, by the way, one of the other boys was
Januarius Aloysius MacGahan, afterward the famous war correspondent
and friend of Skobeloff. Father Zahm told me that MacGahan even at
that time added an utter fearlessness to chivalric tenderness for the
weak, and was the defender of any small boy who was oppressed by a
larger one. Later Father Zahm was at Notre Dame University, in
Indiana, with Maurice Egan, whom, when I was President, I appointed
minister to Denmark.

On the occasion in question Father Zahm had just returned from a trip
across the Andes and down the Amazon, and came in to propose that
after I left the presidency he and I should go up the Paraguay into
the interior of South America. At the time I wished to go to Africa,
and so the subject was dropped; but from time to time afterward we
talked it over. Five years later, in the spring of 1913, I accepted
invitations conveyed through the governments of Argentina and Brazil
to address certain learned bodies in these countries. Then it occurred
to me that, instead of making the conventional tourist trip purely by
sea round South America, after I had finished my lectures I would come
north through the middle of the continent into the valley of the
Amazon; and I decided to write Father Zahm and tell him my intentions.
Before doing so, however, I desired to see the authorities of the